My Summer of
Southern Discomfort
stephanie gayle
To C.S.L.,
for setting me on the path
Contents
Chapter One
I don
t know why she swallowed the lye,
 the boy
Chapter Two
My corkscrew curls, inching upward and outward, each wiry strand
Chapter Three
I am not eager to review the deposition papers Will
Chapter Four
Each time I approach the courthouse on Mulberry Street, I
Chapter Five
I exit the coffee shop with a mocha espresso drink
Chapter Six
To market to market to buy a fat pig. Home
Chapter Seven
This must stop, this dizzying d
 vu. Perhaps I could
Chapter Eight
I had planned to drive to one of my three
Chapter Nine
I can
t be wrong on this. Please, God, do not
Chapter Ten
Blood appears shiny and black in photographs when still fresh,
Chapter Eleven
Friday night. Free at last. From my worn chintz seat
Chapter Twelve
Carl and I have decided that a weekday is best.
Chapter Thirteen
This is just what the doctor ordered. Actually, it is
Chapter Fourteen
Ben is hiding something. He has been out of the
Chapter Fifteen
Someone from the Spring Street frame shop left me a
Chapter Sixteen
Thus far, on my drive to work, I have spotted
Chapter Seventeen
I lean my elbows onto the kitchen tabletop and reach
Chapter Eighteen
Tonight the open windows and doors of Hay House are
Chapter Nineteen
You don
t find it strange?
 I am incredulous, not only
Chapter Twenty
There is a fly somewhere in the courtroom. I try
Chapter Twenty-One
So what
s this, date number seven?
Chapter Twenty-Two
ll reconvene tomorrow at eight o
clock.
 Judge Pullman
bangs his
Chapter Twenty-Three
Life is meant for living,
 I say, an expression favored
Chapter Twenty-Four
The wind is picking up. The heads of the swamp
Chapter Twenty-Five
Judge Pullman assigns a high value to food. Rather than
Chapter Twenty-Six
Today is the day. I am cross-examining a witness. The
Chapter Twenty-Seven
Despite my machine
s autobrew feature I scorched the coffee this
Chapter Twenty-Eight
Where is the damn rice cereal? Rows of cereal line
Chapter Twenty-Nine
The rose-patterned sheets, tangled from my restless sleep, cover half
 239
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Praise
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher
Chapter One
March 11, 2000
I don
t know why she swallowed the lye,
 the boy sings, emphasis on 
 He slips the yellow package of bubble gum into his
pocket too fast, then tilts his head up and smiles at me, teeth bright
against his dark skin. Cute little thief.
Dominic,
 his mother whispers. 
What all are you doing?
 She
brushes raindrops from her tight, glossy curls.
Practicing my magic trick.
 He returns the gum to its candy
tray slot.
Good story, I think. Here in Georgia it is classified misdemeanor
theft by shoplifting. I consider sentencing. A five-dollar fine? Community service?
His mother tells me, 
He wants to be a magician this week.
Anxious to assure me her son is no career criminal.
Unperturbed, he loads a bottle of juice onto the conveyor belt
while singing, 
I don
t know why she swallowed the lye. I guess
ll die.
The supermarket smells of damp overcoats and soil. 
This wet
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
will help,
 the cashier says. 
Before today it was so dry the trees
were bribing the dogs.
 I tilt my head to the side and consider her
comment. Oh. Ha. Will I ever understand this honeyed speech in
real time?
Dominic tries to lift a heavy bag of potatoes from the depths of
the cart. 
I don
t know why she swallowed the lye.
 He lets dramatic
tension build before singing, 
I guess she
ll diiiiiieeeee!
His mother shooshes him while keeping her eyes focused on the
automated scanner.
As he swings into the third verse his mother absentmindedly
remarks in that mysterious way that reveals how maternal brains
are focused on their children at all times, 
Baby, it
s fly, not lye.
Fly.
No, no, I want to tell him. 
 doesn
t make any sense. Who
dies from swallowing a fly? No one. If swallowing flies was fatal,
think how many motorcyclists would litter our highways! But lye
makes sense. Lye is a poisonous substance. Swallowing it might kill
the old lady. Although then the song would have only one verse.
I unload my small basket, careful not to touch the white plastic
divider that separates my single-sized servings from Dominic
s family
s bulk containers of rice, beans, potatoes, orange juice, bananas,
and deli meats. I forget I no longer live in the Northeast where such
trespasses incur stricter punishments.
I place a container of low-fat peach yogurt on the conveyor belt
and consider that maybe it is not lye after all but lie. What if the
old lady swallowed a lie? Now there exists the basis for a multipleversed song. Perhaps she swallowed a lie about someone
s guilt and
the police came to interview her and she had to go to court. I sing
the song inside my head as I set my basket on the linoleum floor,
on top of a discarded weekly with articles devoted to the upcoming
Southern Belle Ball.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Dominic and his mother walk behind their bag-laden cart. It
squeaks toward the automatic doors that will whoosh open and
consume them and their song. I glance out the tall, fingerprintsmudged windows, checking to see if the rain has lessened.
I don
t know why she swallowed the lie.
A dark car drives past and I can feel my forehead tighten as I
squint, trying to see if its license plate is blue and white. The falling
rain obscures it. I contort my neck; adjust my stance, lean forward.
Blue and white? White and blue? Which is it?
The car is gone before I can decide. Not that it matters. It
s not
him. I should know better.
The grocery clerk clears her throat again to get my attention.
I mutter 
sorry
 and give her the money displayed on the register
total. The grocery bag has a grinning pig face on it. 
Keep dry now,
the clerk calls after me.
The puddle-spotted parking lot is almost empty. I curl my toes
inside my damp sneakers and try to think of a different song to
sing. No use dwelling on the lies I swallowed that led me here, to
the Piggly Wiggly parking lot in Macon, Georgia. No use wondering if swallowed lies ever dissolve or if they remain forever hard, like
rocks. After a moment, I move toward my car and begin whistling
Oh, Susannah
 because it is the first song I think of, it sounds
cheerful, and it means nothing to me at all.
Chapter Two
June 26, 2000
My corkscrew curls, inching upward and outward, each wiry strand
like the fiber of a freshly severed rope, tell me that today will be hot
and wet, again.
The iron emits baby-dragon puffs of steam that make my hair
frizz worse as they smooth the creases from my pants. Erasing lines
with the iron
s hot metal face is a little magical. Now you see it,
now you don
t. Comparing laundering to magic would secure my
reputation as an organizational freak among my colleagues at the
district attorney
s office. They see my tidy office and pristine wardrobe as symptoms of an obsessive-compulsive disorder. If only they
knew that I once possessed a life plan, taking me from years fifteen
to sixty-five, and that, until a year ago, I followed that plan without
deviation.
The phone rings and my hand shakes, creating a wrinkle near
the belt line. Silly. I bet it
s Carl calling from the office to confirm
that I will be in court at two o
clock, as if I need reminding.
I pick up the white cordless receiver.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Natalie?
 a male voice asks. Carl. His anxious drawl is inimitable. Before meeting him I did not believe a born-and-bred Georgian could sound jittery while maintaining the slow, thick cadence
of Southern speech. He tells me that Ben called in sick and wants to
know if I can handle the Biddle deposition. A tap-tapping informs
me that he is engaged in the nasty habit of hitting a pencil against
his teeth. The sound makes the dark hairs on my forearms rise.
Certainly. I will be in soon.
 I hang up before he can respond.
It takes two minutes to finish my ironing, the tiny wrinkle I made
near the belt line now a mere memory. If only all mistakes were so
easily erased.
I grab my leather satchel and pause to recheck that the iron is off
and I have all I need: wallet, memos, apple, latest death threat, bills
to be mailed. I scoop my keys from the yellow ceramic bowl in the
narrow front hall. The bowl was my mother
s suggestion for putting
an end to my days of mislaid keys. This foolproof system represents
one of the few things I have adopted from my mother.
From my father, I took almost everything: his brown eyes, his
small ears, his profession, his tenacity, and his name, Goldberg. I am
Natalie Goldberg. My father is Aaron Goldberg, the famous civil
rights lawyer. When people discover I am a lawyer they assume I am
following my father
s path, until I inform them that I work for the
district attorney. 
You mean you work to put people away?
 Yes. I
work to put people away.
Outside the sun is strong and the air covers me like a damp towel.
Atop my front steps I tilt my face skyward and close my eyes. A red
disk hovers in the reversed negative background behind my lids.
The scent of my next-door neighbor
s gardenias tickles my nose. I
open my eyes, adjust my sunglasses, and advance into another Monday, prepared to do battle on behalf of Bibb County, Georgia.
The district attorney
s offices are on Mulberry Street, just be6
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
yond the Grand Opera House, a century-old gem where Houdini
and Charlie Chaplin once performed. Inside our lobby, the security
guard, George, nods as I walk past. He will nod at me on my way out,
assuming I am done with work before his shift ends at seven p.m.
On days less humid than this I take the stairs because the elevator is a death trap. When I push the gold button marked three it
rumbles to life and shakes until it reaches the third floor where it
collapses with a groan. Since I began working here ten months ago
I have asked repeatedly when the elevator will be replaced. My queries have met with incredulous looks, laughter, and the occasional
sympathetic 
Not until someone dies.
Hannah, the new receptionist of the five-inch nail extensions,
hands me two pink message slips and says, 
Morning.
 She does not
offer an opinion on whether the morning is good or not. That isn
in her job description.
The day sounds like any other: phones beeping, papers chugchugging out of the copier, someone saying, 
Wait. Just a minute.
He did what?
 It smells like an intern burned the coffee again. I pass
through the hall, not stopping to call out morning greetings as others do, and head for my office. It once belonged to a popular, now
retired lawyer everyone refers to as 
Guvnor,
 though he never held
a political office. The furniture inside
a massive maple desk and
an imposing matching chair
makes me look Lilliputian. I could
have exchanged the pieces, but I refused, sensing the action would
label me a prima donna.
The furniture is the only thing with personality in the room. No
photographs disturb the order of my desk. My degrees from Smith
and Harvard remain in storage. Anyone entering my office would
be hard-pressed to identify its owner. It could belong to anyone, or
rather, to no one.
I turn the lights and air-conditioning on and shrug my linen
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
jacket off. I reach, tiptoe, to hang it on the closet door hook, to preserve its wrinkle-free state for my court appearance and the absent
s deposition. I search my desk for his paperwork.
A knock on my open door draws my gaze to William Brown,
district attorney. He wears a pin-striped three-piece suit that belongs on an older white man. Will, the youngest and only black DA
in the city
s history, has enough to battle without adding fashion
worries to his list. He stands on my threshold holding a sheaf of
papers. 
Looking for these?
If that is Ben
s deposition, yes. If it is anything else, no.
He hesitates before asking, 
You okay? Not feeling overloaded,
are you? I can assign Ben
s deposition to Carl.
My head is shaking 
 before he has finished. 
No, I
m fine.
I extend my hand for the papers. He steps forward and relinquishes
them.
I know things have been tough since Jeffrey left.
I make a noise, signaling agreement, but not loudly enough to
be considered complaint.
Jeffrey Barr mentored me during my first months here. He quit
five weeks ago. The office gossipmongers are still speculating. Some
say he left because he was not nominated for Will
s position, others
say his marriage was on the rocks, and there is always the argument
that, after twelve years, he burned out. Whatever the reason, Jeffrey
left, and the rest of us are scrambling to take on extra cases.
Will
s hazel eyes search my room. 
It occurs to me that you
haven
t taken any vacation since you arrived. Summertime can
be a bit quiet around here, what with all the judges golfing.
smiles and I smile in return because he is my boss. 
If you want
to take some time off, we can reshuffle your caseload. Maybe give
you a chance to finally unpack your things.
 He stares at my bare
walls.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Thanks. I
ll think about it.
 He nods, and begins to leave but
stops. What now?
Natalie, I don
t think I
ve told you how pleased I am that you
joined our office. I still don
t understand why you sacrificed a position at a major Manhattan law firm for this low-paying support
position
a silence extends, a pause I could fill with explanations
but don
t, as usual
but I
m grateful that you did. You met a sharp
learning curve and handled it beautifully.
 He stares at the large
chair I half hide behind. 
I think Guvnor would be proud,
 he says,
earning a small but honest smile from me.
Thank you, Will.
 I want to say more but my tight throat won
let any more words past.
No, thank you,
 he says before leaving, gazing at a space filled
with Guvnor
s furniture and little else.
I sit and rub my index finger over my right eyebrow. A quiet,
dry laugh escapes me. Poor Will, still wondering why I chose to
abandon the fast track of corporate law for public prosecution work.
Many times I have explained that I never wanted to pursue corporate law. He keeps asking why, in indirect ways. Somehow Will has
sussed out that I am not telling the whole truth and nothing but
the truth.
I rub my sweaty palms against the cool wooden desk. The truth
would destroy hope of further comparisons to good old Guvnor.
Coming to Macon was not motivated by a desire to change career
tracks. It was the result of a disastrous love affair.
My honesty about not wanting to work in corporate law is unimpeachable. I aspired to civil rights law, my father
s field. I sought
to expand its reach to foreign soil, to apply a higher standard to
international human rights, to make the world a better place. Three
years at Harvard Law wasn
t enough to knock the ideological stuffing out of me. Still, no one offered me the position of 
improver of
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the human condition
 upon graduation. When the offers came in,
I found myself faced with a decision. I could work for a national
nonprofit organization I was less committed to or I could work for
the bad guys, defenders of capitalist wealth, who offered me outrageous salaries and benefits for my overeducated mind.
My father urged me to work at Walters, MacLittle, and Tate.
Their reputation was the best and they had recently instituted pro
bono work, requiring it of new associates. I could do good-guy stuff
on the side. No matter that they only did so to refute accusations
that they had been less willing to contribute to the city
s supply of
pro bono lawyers than any other large firm.
s blessing, combined with a spreadsheet that revealed that
working there for four years would allow me to pursue my dream
job financially unhindered, made signing the cream vellum letter
of acceptance easier. Even the life plan I had created allowed for
a five-year span of work unrelated to human rights law. I was still
pursuing the dream.
Working at Walters, MacLittle, and Tate, I noticed three things
immediately: I was one of fifteen female lawyers in a stable of one
hundred and fifty lawyers; no one at the firm referred to President
Bill Clinton without sneering; and everyone played golf. Mars could
not have been more surreal.
My first nine months were spent working seventeen-hour days
broken only by bathroom visits and meals eaten at my desk. In
my small cell I reviewed figures and reread contracts, trying to spot
loopholes through which our clients could be divested of some of
their billions of dollars. Then, one day, an associate
s appendix ruptured. His caseload included an upcoming SEC investigation of a
client. I was told to meet with the supervising lawyer, Henry Tate,
immediately.
Henry was the Tate, the third partner of the firm and the young10
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
est. His hair was gray, but he had an athlete
s body. By the few
wrinkles on his face I judged him to be forty-six. He laughed as he
shook my hand. He gestured me to sit before asking, 
Expecting
someone older?
I apologized, mentally berating myself for my transparent
expression.
No need. Now if you had expected someone younger, why then
I might ask for the apology you so kindly offered.
 He didn
t tell me
his age then; I later learned it to be fifty-two.
His ease, his humor, and his good will comforted me. In that
place where few people spoke to me except to ask if I had the papers ready yet or if I knew where the blue copy paper was stored, I
yearned for human contact as I never had before. Still, Henry Tate
wasn
t just anyone. I sensed it as he explained the importance of the
case before us and of our work on it. As his deep voice continued
to expound in multisyllabic legalese I found myself believing his
words; that was his gift, his magic. He made you believe, or want to
believe. And that was my mistake: falling in love with Henry Tate
and his words.
Chapter Three
I am not eager to review the deposition papers Will gave me. Ben,
who was handling the case, is my least favorite colleague. I first
saw him at the water cooler, discussing opposing counsel. He said,
Helen Leland. You know, the reason God made miniskirts?
 Afterward, when I saw his plush head of gray hair bent over a letter or his
stout form leaving for court, I thought, 
That
s Ben Maddox. The
reason God made sexual harassment laws.
 Further interaction with
him has done little to improve upon that impression.
I shuffle the papers so all the corners are aligned. Then I begin
making preliminary notes in my Black n
 Red notebook. When
my friend Lacey returned from her postgraduation literary tour
of Europe, she gave me a set of London Bridge salt and pepper
shakers and a sturdy notebook with a red and black elastic that
bound its pages together. 
Legal pads are so trite,
 Lacey said,
helping me pack for Harvard. 
Dare to be different, darling.
She dropped the r in 
darling
 for an elongated 
 sound.
Marlene Dietrich or maybe Joan Crawford. I have trouble de-
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
ciphering Lacey
s film star impersonations. They all sound alike
to me.
I exhale, dazed. Reviewing Ben
s work is a novel experience. I
feared that reading his notes would be like exploring a dark cave
littered with bat excrement and scary half-human grunts. Instead I
have stumbled across an underground paradise glittering with uncut gems. 
She saw Brown shoot Anderson from her second-floor
window. Be sure she demonstrates how close they stood to each
other. Have her repeat Brown
s words to Anderson: 
You will pay for
that.
 He had distilled the elements of the case into brief, clear sentences few lawyers, muddled by years of reading and writing obtuse
language, can construct.
Nowhere did I find evidence of the good old boy who routinely
quotes the Bible and conservative politicians. No signs of the sexist
who calls all women, regardless of age, 
little lady.
I put aside the papers and extract my things from my briefcase.
Damn. The death threat. I forgot to mention it to Will, and to give
it to Hannah for filing. We maintain a file of all threats: death and
other. Each has to be reported to the Macon Police Department.
Mine arrived Friday evening in my post office box. Addressed to
Natile Goldburg, Atorny, Macon, the plain white envelope contained
a sheet ripped from a spiral-bound notebook. The misspelled note
referred to me as a Jew bitch and Nazi racist, a combination that
assured me studying history was not the writer
s hobby. It came one
day after my prosecution of Mr. Arnold Harlen and his sentence to
twenty-five years in prison for two counts of armed robbery. My
mother told me you can
t please everyone, but I didn
t believe her.
Criminal law has taught me what my mother never could: there is
no such thing as a happy compromise.
I set aside the death threat. I don
t believe a Harlen family member will kill me. Whoever wrote the note made no attempt to find
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
my unlisted telephone number and address. The letter breached the
sanctum of my mailbox only because Macon postal employees care
that letters are delivered to the proper address, even when misaddressed. After years of experiencing postal employee indifference, I
am more surprised by this dedication than any threatening note.
I extract my laptop from the long, low drawer of the multishelved
bookcase behind me. The machine whirls, chirps, and beeps. E-mail
comes first. Among the two dozen requests for legal information,
notices of trials, and job-related business is a message titled 
Word
for the day
 with Lacey
s return address. I open it first.
Nat,
Have you seen the new Alumnae Quarterly yet? Claudia Monroe
has a wedding photo inside. She got married in March. To a man!
Miss 
m here, I
m queer, and I
m not going anywhere
 donned a
white gown and is playing Barbie to some Miami plastic surgeon
Ken. So, in honor of Claudia
s new straight-girl status, I
ve coined
a new word: heterotory (he
t' -ro
) n. Meaning: The heteroe
sexual territory explored by persons formerly identified as gay.
Example: I wonder how long Claudia
s sojourn into heterotory
will last?
Care to place a wager?
Love,
Lacey
Should I reply? No. I will call her tonight. I am running behind
schedule with Ben
s work on my desk.
My Smith education is one of the strikes Ben holds against me.
He thinks it remains a home for privileged young women whose
families send them to get a little learning until it is time to marry.
When I attended, Smith was an ultraliberal campus funded by con15
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
servative money. Ben, who is fifty-six and does not know anyone
who graduated post-1962, assumes the school has not changed, and
so regards me as one of the spoiled 
girls with pearls.
My Harvard degree also riles him. Ben attended Mercer University School of Law, just down the road, where, he tells me, he
received an education equal to mine. Based on his notes, I am inclined to agree. I wonder if Mercer
s faculty does not feel compelled
to stuff their students
 heads with as many fifty-cent legal terms as
possible.
The phone rings. It
s Carl. He is tapping his pencil against his
teeth again. I grind my teeth in response and assure him that I am
handling Ben
s deposition and I will be in court to handle Mr. Gaffer
s arraignment. If I were paranoid, I would worry about Carl
monitoring of my work. If I were susceptible, I might find his attentions flattering. He is thirty-three, thus age appropriate, and one
handsome Gentile: blond hair, blue eyes, and a great smile. Unfortunately, he is plagued by a need to make sure that everything is
operating as it should. I cannot remember a time I felt things were
operating as they should. Before I came to Macon, certainly, but
how long ago?
Chapter Four
Each time I approach the courthouse on Mulberry Street, I remember first seeing it from the half-open window of a cab, as I traveled
from the airport to my new house. The passing faces, all brown, my
driver
s bewildering speech, and the strong perfume of jasmine and
barbecuing meats overwhelmed me.
All red brick, windows, and Roman columns, the courthouse
guarded the corner of two busy streets. A squat clock tower sat atop
the flat roof, covered by a green dome. The rusted Roman numerals
on the clock
s large face indicated it was almost noon. Stopped at
the red light, I watched as the clock
s huge wooden hands reached
higher. A deep tolling sounded. The cabbie pointed and said something. Not understanding, I followed his pointed forefinger and
watched, astonished, as the clock
s hands sped forward ten minutes. We drove past and I asked what had just happened. Through
hand gestures and repeated words, he made me understand that the
wooden hands were too heavy. Their weight caused the clock to run
fast at its zenith and slow at the half-hour mark. My back pressed
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
against the cracked navy leather of my seat and I smiled. It was a
tiny smile, little more than a grimace, but it was enough. I had come
to a place where the weight of a clock
s hands prevented it from
keeping proper time.
The courthouse is still my favorite building. There are prettier
places in Macon
Hay House, Woodruff House, and the whole
of downtown when the city
s 275,000 Yoshino cherry trees blossom
but the courthouse remains embedded in my memory as the
building with the quirk that made me smile on a very hard day. I
have since learned that the courthouse, completed in 1924, is Bibb
County
s fourth.
It used to house prisoners but it was deemed a potential firetrap,
so in 1980 a caravan of cop cars led and followed a group of school
buses filled with prisoners to their new home in the Bibb County
Law Enforcement Center on Oglethorpe. I learned about the transport and courthouse details from court employees and locals who
like to share details of Macon
s past.
Coming from Cambridge, Massachusetts, I had ingested a steady
diet of Pilgrims, Indians, and Founding Fathers, and followed the
paths of Plimoth Plantation and the Freedom Trail on school trips
with mind-numbing regularity. In Cambridge, however, history was
treated as the past: a slide show to watch and admire. Here, in Macon, history is a different piece of the present, a little worn at the
edges and faded, but still tangible. This living past appeals to me in
a way I did not anticipate.
A sense of peace fills me as I ascend steps shadowed by an arched
brick entryway. I doubt most people enter the courthouse feeling
this way. Sounds bounce from the marble lobby floors and ricochet
around the room
s high ceiling. I nod to the building employees
and attorneys I recognize and stare at those I don
t know. Today
the lobby is quiet. Will was right about the courthouse schedule
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
slowing down in the summer. Though crimes tend to rise, judges
tend to disappear, and so the court calendar fills with hearings and
arraignment delays.
Just beyond the lobby, propped against the wall beside the closed
doors of Courtroom One stands the scarecrow figure of Detective
Wilkins. He taps his cap against his right thigh in a slow, steady
rhythm. I advance until I am standing in his long shadow. He
looks down. 
Hello, Miss Goldberg,
 he says, his voice cautious
but friendly. He doesn
t know why I am here. It could be to harass
him about evidence he has gathered that I am not satisfied with
or it could be to say thank you for work well done. I am here for
neither.
Good afternoon, Detective Wilkins. Testifying today?
 His cap
tapping makes me think so. Some cops loathe entering that small
wooden box and restating facts before judge, jury, and attorneys.
Detective Wilkins is one of them. He presents well: an authoritative
voice and a temper most defense attorneys find difficult to rile. He
does not enjoy it, though.
Just waiting around for Frank.
 Frank Cox is his partner, a heavy
man with a handlebar moustache and thinning hair. Seen together,
Wilkins and Cox look like a mismatched nursery-rhyme couple.
I won
t keep you. Seeing you reminded me that I received a
death threat this weekend, so I can have one of the clerks drop it off
at the station, or leave it at our front desk for pickup.
Another one?
 His black eyebrows descend into diagonal slashes
and his coffee-colored lips purse as if for a kiss. It
s his deep-thought
look. 
Didn
t you receive one last month?
Yes, but that was related to the Gomes case, and it seemed like
a juvenile prank. Your partner thought so,
 I say, trying to lift his
brows back to normal position with my nonchalance. 
This one has
to do with the Harlen case. Ten to one it
s a family member.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
ve gotten popular fast.
 He stares at me, trying to see what
it is about me that prompts people to pen death threats.
s the job.
 I shrug, trying to wiggle out from his gaze. 
not worried. It didn
t come to my house or anything. Just my post
office box, and the person didn
t have the number.
God bless the Macon post office,
 he mutters. 
ll send someone by for it.
I switch my briefcase from right hand to left. 
ll set it out front
after I return to the office.
Where is it now?
On the desk in my office. I forgot to file it with the others this
morning.
He sighs, a Lord-grant-me-patience sigh. 
Miss Goldberg, you
have to treat each threat as if it were real, no matter how silly it may
seem.
 A headshake is followed by, 
I bet your parents would be appalled if they knew how casually you treat these letters.
My right foot taps against the marble. 
Detective, I am not a
child anymore, and if I seem blas
 about the threats it may be because I grew up in a house where these sorts of letters filled our
mailbox. My father
s cases made some people very angry.
 This is
true, although I do not mention that these letters were hidden from
me until I was a teenager and that they terrified me with their ugly
words promising retribution in blood. I
m trying to establish an 
grew up in the trenches
 bravado.
Detective Wilkins falls for it. He nods, his brows level again.
File it as soon as you get back to the office, and I
ll send someone
to get it.
 I agree and am prepared to walk away when he adds,
ve a dab of something on your pants.
I look down. A small stain, darker than the gray of my pants,
dots my right thigh. It wasn
t there this morning. 
Shit,
 I say and
then mumble, 
Sorry.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Nice to know you
re capable of agitation.
 His mouth twitches
in harmony with his lifted brows.
His tone, his expression, combined with Will
s statements of this
morning, make me ask, 
Does everyone around here think I
m inhuman?
 I curse myself as soon as the words are out of my mouth.
I don
t care what they think.
His smile returns. 
Frank thinks you were raised in a convent by
lawyers and librarians.
And you?
 Good Lord, why can
t I keep my mouth closed?
Oh, Frank
s crazy.
 I reward him with a smile. 
I figure there
had to be a couple of marines to help.
 His quiet laughter colors the
tips of my ears red. I walk away before he sees this.
The second floor of the courthouse contains offices and meeting
rooms. In one of these rooms the deposition of Mrs. Clay Biddle is
to be held. Mary Biddle, who prefers to be called Mrs. Clay Biddle,
witnessed a murder twelve days ago. She claims to have seen her
neighbor, Nelson Brown, shoot and kill his friend John Anderson.
Normally, the attorney the DA assigns to the case would call upon
Mrs. Biddle to testify at trial. Unfortunately, Mrs. Biddle is a woman
in her late sixties plagued by diabetes and heart complications. She
is scheduled to enter the Medical Center of Central Georgia for a
triple bypass next week. As the outcome of such an operation is uncertain and Mr. Brown
s trial is not scheduled until six weeks later,
our office has taken the precaution of deposing Mrs. Biddle before
she enters the operating room.
Opposing counsel, in the form of Ms. Helen Leland, 
the reason
God made miniskirts,
 is already seated at the table. From her lacquered blond updo to her pale peach suit, Helen proves that there
is life after beauty pageants. Miss Georgia 1994 often uses her feminine wiles in court to persuade her victims that she is harmless, just
before she mauls them. I have seen her reduce an egotistical pillar
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
of the community to a teary mess in less than ten minutes. I admire
her, but the cretins she defends are often so deplorable I question
her judgment. These are the type of men who torture fellow humans because they 
were just having a little fun.
I nod to Helen and she says 
good afternoon
 in the same tone
that once answered the title-determining question in the 1994 Miss
Georgia pageant: 
If you could be any flower, which would you
 Helen
s answer: 
The Cherokee Rose, because it represents the
proud state of Georgia and because its many thorns prove that it is
strong while its delicate petals show that it is beautiful. And that
how I like to think of myself: beautiful, strong, and a Georgian
through and through.
ve seen the tape. She looks younger, wearing a white sequined evening gown, but her flawless smile is the
same.
The court clerk and stenographer are present. A small Bible rests
on the long wooden table, ready to be used to swear in Mrs. Biddle
before her testimony. I rearrange my papers and glance at my watch.
s 12:34 p.m. Helen peeks at my watch, too, not to check the time,
for there is a loud, ticking timepiece on the wall. It is the covert stare
of a woman examining another woman
s jewelry. The watch has an
eighteen-karat white gold band and a mother-of-pearl dial, circled
by diamonds. A Hanukkah present to myself when last year
s watch
broke. I upgraded, in a major way. Helen
s eyes follow the band as
I adjust it.
I stare at Helen
s manicured hands and wonder if her shaped oval
fingernails are real. My ruminations are cut short by the arrival of
Mrs. Biddle. She rushes into the room, wheezing, her sizable bosom
straining her black silk dress. The clerk hurries forward to assist her
into her seat. I hope she lives long enough to give us her testimony.
After a glassful of water and a few minutes to 
compose herself 
Mrs. Clay Biddle launches into her tale. She is a good storyteller, the
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
kind we in the DA
s office love. She does not embellish unnecessarily or contradict her earlier statement to the police.
She seems to have stepped from the pages of a novel. Over her
black silk dress she wears a doilylike shawl. When relating distressing details she presses a violet embroidered handkerchief to her
broad mahogany brow. Yet I sense she is a stoic Southern woman.
The kind who has buried children and suffered bad husbands and
worked two or more shifts and kept body and soul together when
weaker humans would give up. Mrs. Biddle triumphs over all, including Helen
s many attempts to make her admit that her failing
health might have been responsible for misidentifying the accused.
She admits that diabetes often impairs people
s vision, but says she
had her eyes examined two weeks ago.
My doctor says I still don
t need glasses, just a coronary artery
bypass grafting operation for three blocked arteries.
 That puts a
stop to Helen
s questions about her health.
Helen leaves after the testimony is signed and sealed, no doubt
planning her bargaining strategy. She has to know the case against
her client is locked. I approach Mrs. Biddle.
t no thing but a chicken wing.
 She pats my proffered right
hand and smiles at my surprise. During her testimony, she had used
very little vernacular. 
t you worry, butterfly. I know how and
when to talk proper.
I tell her the district attorney
s office appreciates her civic assistance in this case, and she waves aside my thanks. 
I just hope that
s mother can sleep at night easier. Both boys
 mothers. Sometimes
losing your own to prison isn
t an easy thing, but the right thing.
I walk alongside her downstairs, she on her way home and I
to the courtroom for my two p.m. arraignment of Mr. Gaffer for
one count of conspiracy to commit murder. She squeezes my hand
when we reach the lobby.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
It nearly stopped my ticker seeing two girls waiting for me,
 she
confesses. 
I thought I was in the wrong room.
 Oh no, not another
older female who believes women like Helen and me belong in a
kitchen chasing a toddler.
That other lawyer sure was sharp, wasn
t she?
 she says.
Knives could take lessons,
 I agree.
Mrs. Biddle cackles. 
You two gonna be all right. Bet you have
the men around here
she glances at the suited and uniformed
males nearby
running scared.
 I feel the tug in my left cheek that
signifies my dimple is on display.
You take care.
 I pray that her surgery goes well.
ll be just fine, butterfly. Now go give 
em hell.
 She waves her
handkerchief at me.
I square my shoulders and exhale. Showtime.
Chapter Five
I exit the coffee shop with a mocha espresso drink around three
clock. My postarraignment-hearing caffeine shot, to be savored
along with the remand judgment I wrestled out of Judge Thompson. He is known to be liberal in making allowances for the accused,
but I took every reasonable objection he, the defendant, and his
attorney had and stomped all over them in my two-inch heels. Mr.
Michael Gaffer will not be vacating his room at the Bibb County
Law Enforcement Center anytime soon.
A large swallow of my drink wraps my taste buds around my
twin loves of chocolate and coffee. I am getting better at this legal
game. Perhaps I should celebrate by sitting down on a bench and
finishing my drink in the out-of-doors.
I look across the street to where two benches are unoccupied.
Something on the periphery makes me turn my head. I gasp, choking on my coffee. Henry. He stands outside the hardware store, his
face dark with a shadow cast by the store
s awning. He is looking
in the opposite direction, toward the library. Henry loves libraries.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
My drink sloshes in its container and my briefcase bangs against my
thigh in rhythm with my hurried steps. Bang, bang, bang.
He has come to apologize, to ask me to forgive him, to explain.
I am almost there. Soon I will be on his side of the street, within
striking distance. He will smell as he always does, a blend of books
and leather and man and bay rum. I ignore a driver
s graphic insult
as I run in front of his car on the very street where I prosecute others for lawlessness. I narrow my eyes against the afternoon sun. I
switch coffee and briefcase to my left hand. My right forms a fist. I
will bruise his eyes, both eyes. He turns and the helium leaves my
body, for the man I am hurrying toward is not my former lover and
boss, but a total stranger. He is tall and gray-haired, yes, but heavier
and older and, dear God, balding. My face blooms red as a poppy;
I can feel the heat.
m sorry,
 the man says to me, backing up a step. 
Do I know
you?
 My head shakes in violent denial. 
No, no.
Oh, I thought perhaps
 Why must he continue? I have to
stop him.
No, I . . . I thought you were someone else, someone I knew.
m sorry.
 And I am, far sorrier than he will ever know.
The fake Henry backs up another step. Did he see the fury in my
face? Does he know I was about to hit him?
Sorry,
 he says, but sounds relieved.
This is not the first time. I have seen other Henries in other
places, parking outside the video store, mailing a package at the post
office, driving past the grocery.
Nine months ago, while shopping for shampoo, I mistook a man
no older than myself for Henry. It was the way he was reading the
label on the back of a bottle of hair gel. Henry read everything with
fixed attention: flyers, grocery lists, and law briefs. When the young
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
man set the container down to ask, 
Miss, are you okay?
 his voice
was rich and smooth, like caramel, even better than Henry
s voice.
That was the worst moment. I ran away, afraid to look and see that
he was more attractive, as well. I could not bear it, not then. Now I
want only to kick him, maim him, wound him, ruin him.
I know he is not coming. It has been almost a year. Why must I
spot these imposters?
I toss my three-quarters-full drink in the nearest trash receptacle. My throat feels swollen and the beverage has lost its curative
power. My white-knuckled grip on my briefcase renders my hand
half numb when I reach my office. I drop it and reach for the death
threat, Officer Wilkins
s stern warning in my ears. My swiftness in
taking it to Hannah owes less to his ire and more to the fact that
the letter represents something I can do, now, a task to accomplish.
Anything to keep me from thinking of what transpired on the street,
my near assault of a stranger.
Hannah takes the envelope with a sniff not symptomatic of a
cold.
Something the matter?
 I ask as she turns to look at her phone
board, aglow with little red lights representing other people
conversations.
 she says, as if I am crazy for asking. 
Just seems a lot of
people don
t like you around here.
I almost ask if she is one of them but I don
t. I head for my office
where paperwork awaits. You would think it was chocolate the way
I hurry toward it.
Chapter Six
To market to market to buy a fat pig. Home again, home again,
jiggety jig.
 Perhaps it
s not the best nursery rhyme for a Jew, but
I never kept kosher and I do not know any other homecoming
rhymes except for 
Ladybug, Ladybug, fly away home
 and that
involves arson.
The living room glows in the legacy of the late setting sun. My
hand hovers over the light switch. The pale blue walls are lavender
and the long low coffee table before my sofa shines pink, as if blushing. I swallow as if I could imbibe the stillness and let it settle in my
stomach, warm and soft. And then I flip the switch and expose my
life to incandescence.
A cricket symphony practices outside the living room windows
left open for ventilation. I silence them with the air conditioner. I
walk through the house, dropping items into their appropriate places:
keys in the bowl, satchel by the front hall, mail on the kitchen counter, peaches in the fruit bowl.
I dial Lacey
s number. It rings three times. She is not home or
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
not answering, because it only takes me two rings to reach from one
end of Lacey
s studio apartment to the other. Maybe one and a half
rings for Lacey. She has longer legs. After four rings her machine
voice says, 
You have reached . . . me. The bad news is I
m not here.
The good news is that I hope to be here again sometime. Leave a
message. Oh, and if you have bad news? Call someone else.
I hang up before the screeching beep ends. I will try her again
later.
In the kitchen I consider my dinner options. The phone rings.
Did Lacey intuit my need to talk? I close the refrigerator and pick
up the phone.
Hi, sweetheart.
Lacey never calls me 
sweetheart
 and her voice, bless her, never
has this much sunshine in it. She was born in the age of irony, unlike my mother.
Hi, Mom, how are you?
Oh, fine, fine. The Kleins stopped by for dinner last night.
The Kleins do not ensure that my mother is fine; she
s just following the scripted pattern of our conversations. It starts with the
inquiry of well-being, continues to updates on friends of the family,
and concludes with the tricky business of asking about me. This
used to be much easier. My parents would telephone every Sunday
and Wednesday evening, each on separate phones, and they would
hurl questions at me with the enthusiasm of news correspondents.
s school?
Did you find matching shoes for your party dress?
Are you still seeing that boy from your contracts class?
How was
the movie?
 Everything, anything, mattered to them. As their only
child I was the sun they orbited. The sun
s light has faded, I think,
looking to my window. The rectangle shows a navy blue world of
shadows. The sun is gone.
Today is Monday. The calls do not come as before. Weeks elapse
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
between them, and when I answer the phone there is no overlap
of voices, only my mother
s. She spends much of the conversation
avoiding mention of the pink elephant trumpeting in the middle of
the room.
The pink elephant would be my defection to Georgia. When
I telephoned with the news of my imminent relocation my father
asked, 
Georgia, as in the Republic of Georgia by the Black Sea, or
Georgia as in the Peach State?
 He hoped I meant the former because that Georgia promised unique opportunities to advance the
democratic cause of justice. What could Georgia, former land of the
Confederacy, offer? My mother worried that there would be no Jews
to play or pray with or marry.
s Dad?
Oh, busy. You know him. Workaholic. I don
t think I
ve seen
more than ten minutes of him this week.
 Her voice, coiled higher
and tenser than a tightrope, betrays her. Your father is superbusy so
he is not here is her story. My father doesn
t want to talk to me is
mine.
He carried me on his shoulders and played tea party with me
and quizzed me for spelling tests. I brought him papers marked with
check pluses and gave him the clay rabbit I made in art class and
confided that I didn
t like Mom
s lasagna but ate it because I didn
want to hurt her feelings. He said he did the same thing.
Now I present my check pluses to my mother. 
The DA stopped
by my office this morning. Told me what a good job I was doing.
Honey, that
s wonderful.
 It is, hearing her praise me in her
s hang your picture on the refrigerator
 tone. Is it too much to
suppose she will tell my father or that if she does he will care?
Yeah, it felt good.
m sure he
ll write you a glowing recommendation when you
decide where to work.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I say nothing. It is clear that, for my parents, until I ascend the
Mason-Dixon, no job I possess will be considered real, no house a
home, and no existence a life. She may be right.
Baby?
Sorry, Mom, I
m here. I was just spacing out for a moment.
Wishing that I could enjoy, not endure, our exchange.
re probably tired. Bet you worked late and just got in the
door.
 She has me there. 
Just like your father.
Where once there would have been laughter or a mock rueful
sigh there is only silence. I am so much like my father that I do not
bridge this gap. I make my mother do it.
Well, princess, I
ll let you get back to your life. You take care.
I will.
Love you.
Love you, too. Bye.
I replace the phone and wonder if there is any red wine left. I
hope so.
Before I will allow myself food I must change. I twist and bend,
hurrying to remove my clothes. The fabrics feel heavy and tight. I
exchange the gray suit for a blue tank top and itty-bitty shorts. So
short, in fact, they don
t deserve the name shorts. They are sho
Wine and cheese and crackers for dinner. The wine is ChoreyLes-Beaune 
Vieilles Vignes
 Dubois, a vintage recommended by
Lacey who dated a sommelier from Le Cirque. The cheese is Brie de
Meaux, from Anne
s Organics on the corner of Third and Cherry.
The crackers are Ritz.
I set the plate on the coffee table and my glass atop a coaster. My
butt squeaks against the pine boards of the living room floor as I
slide forward. One more squeak brings me to the box labeled #11,
smith college. It belongs in the closet where things I cannot bear
to part with but do not need are stored. The list cataloguing the
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
s contents says box #11 holds art, calendars, diploma, papers,
photographs, textbooks, and yearbooks. It is the diploma I want.
I dissect the clear packing tape with a scissor blade and fold back
the cardboard skin of the box. Before I touch anything inside, I
wipe stray cracker crumbs onto my cool thighs. On top, layered in
tissue paper, resting on weighty textbooks and copies of political
science essays, is the art. Should I bother? Why not? Maybe there is
something worthwhile inside to hang on my bare office walls.
The tissue peels away like onionskin. Inside, a dark-eyed girl
stares at a book, her eyes too unfocused to be engaged in reading.
Her teardrop earrings tangle in her hair. Her charcoal lips curl to the
right, an infant smile meant for no one to see. She looks happy, this
girl, and I want to reach into the heavy, pitted art paper and wrap
my arms about her, kiss her baby-round cheek and promise I won
hurt her ever. But I will. Because the girl is me and before I am done
with her she will be thinner and colder and that infant smile will
have died a premature death.
Many of the charcoal sketches, pencil drawings, watercolors, and
small oil paintings depict me: reading, sitting, sleeping, daydreaming. My friend Katherine painted in school. She often asked me to
model for her. Delighted to be selected from a horde of prettier girls,
I let her sketch me whenever she wanted. She told me, 
re perfect. Your face shows everything you feel. You
re better than twelve
different people.
 She concluded, 
You must be a terrible liar.
 She
was right. Back then I could not tell a lie with any confidence. She
would marvel at me now.
I set each portrait aside, lingering over a stray curl or a tiny frown
line. So young, so vulnerable. I wonder if my colleagues would recognize the girl in these portraits? I set aside the pictures and dig
into the box until I find my framed degree, written in Latin, showing that I graduated with a B.A. in political science. I take the di33
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
ploma and artwork to my bedroom where I lay it atop my queen
s sheets adorned with huge pink roses. Living here, I felt free
to choose a bold romantic floral pattern. Back home I would have
restrained myself to a small lilac print or miniature bluebells.
In the living room I reassemble box #11, entombing its contents
again. I return it to the box closet and look for box #12 that contains my Harvard Law School diploma. Nudging aside another box,
I find box #14, Walters, MacLittle, and Tate. I step back. Oh God,
that box. Packed almost a year ago, without the usual care. No list
exists for that box. I remember what is stored inside, and what led
to its packing.
Most days Henry sat at a forty-five-degree angle, dividing his
view between the door and the window. He said he liked to keep
an eye on each. He faced the door only when he was entertaining a troubled client. I entered his office on July 8, 1999, to find
him seated at his desk. Inside, both senior partners, Walters and
MacLittle, stood shoulder to shoulder at the window, staring at the
tiny people below them. Both men turned when I said, 
m sorry.
I came to ask
Mr. Walters interrupted me with a phlegmatic throat-clearing.
This was the second time I had seen him. He rarely visited the offices; his responsibility was maintaining relationships with the upper echelon of clients, those so wealthy that they required someone
whose name was on the firm
s doors. He had old-man eyebrows:
wiry white bushes large enough to nest a small collection of birds.
His brows lowered as he focused his pale blue eyes on me.
Miss Goldberg. We were hoping you might drop by.
 My hands
felt as if they had fallen asleep and were beginning to regain sensation. Prickles of pain danced along my palms.
MacLittle gave me a thorough once-over. His was the stare of a
construction worker eyeing a female passerby. That look, coupled
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
with Mr. Walters
s inference, worried me. Did they know about
Henry and me? I looked at Henry. His face was turned toward the
door as if he was expecting someone else, but nobody came.
t you please have a seat?
 Mr. Walters said. I sat in the
nearest chair. My legs felt as if they were filled with concrete. 
I have
heard some disturbing news.
Oh, God, I thought. I kept my eyes focused on his wild brows.
It concerns the Gibbons account.
Gibbons account. Henry had had me work on it several months
ago. Work associated with a new venture Gibbons was launching.
Travel enterprises.
Our client is unhappy,
 Mr. Walters said. His frown indicated
he was none too pleased about this. 
What we fail to understand is
why you chose to establish a separate corporation rather than create
a subsidiary corporation.
 His words were clipped.
What?
 I shook my head.
Surely you understand that by failing to create a subsidiary considered under tax purposes as a disregarded entity under IRC section 7701, you have exposed Gibbons Inc. to liabilities that may be
incurred by Travel Express?
 MacLittle asked.
Of course I understood that. I had said as much to Henry, who
had been considering creating another corporation, not a subsidiary. I had left my recommendations and paperwork on his desk.
While we agree it was kind of Henry to give you this extraordinary opportunity to work with such a high-profile client, he agrees
it was premature and ill-advised,
 Walters said.
Premature? Ill-advised? I had been handling this sort of work for
six months. I had created more than one subsidiary corporation. Or
rather, Henry had. I was not allowed to sign off on the paperwork,
not yet. Henry said he would recommend a promotion soon. I was
learning so fast.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
My hands tingled, hot and cold, hot and cold.
Oh, God. Henry. He had taken the wrong set of papers, those
he had given me for review. He had signed off on the wrong set, not
mine. Mine were flawless.
I didn
 I began.
MacLittle interrupted. 
Shhh,
 he said. He put his finger to his
lips, a parody of a librarian.
We understand you must be upset. It isn
t every day you have
such an opportunity.
I broke my gaze from MacLittle long enough to look at Henry.
He watched us as if we were actors. His hands rested limp in his
lap; his shoulders sagged. He was not going to contradict them. I
looked away.
I am afraid, however, that we are going to have to reduce your
workload in consideration of this development.
Your SEC filing work looks very thorough,
 he said, nodding.
No. Not SEC filings. It was elevated paralegal work.
I leaned back into my chair as he approached to stand beside Mr.
Walters. The two loomed over me like disapproving parents. 
will want to pass off any other open casework you have to other associates. Some new filing work has been settled on your desk this
afternoon.
 They were demoting me for a mistake for which I was
not responsible.
A bird flew past the window, a small, dirty pigeon. 
Rats with
wings,
 people called them. There were worse kinds of rats.
My mind raced. Even if I managed to survive the demotion,
what then? Work my way back to a position I held now? What if
somebody made another mistake? Would I be fired? Blame the new,
Jew girl? Why not?
I flexed my hands. Why not?
That
s kind of you,
 I said. I coughed, trying to clear my throat.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
But unnecessary. In fact, it
s fortuitous that you are both present.
My hands felt as if they were on fire. What was I doing?
Walters cocked his head to the side and MacLittle frowned. They
did not know what to make of this.
I have been offered another job, which I intend to accept.
The words came out faster than I intended. Bluffing was never my
strength.
Well, well,
 MacLittle said.
Where?
 Henry finally spoke. He stared at me, his eyes dark.
With regret?
Georgia.
Georgia?
 he repeated.
Well, well.
 MacLittle seemed not to know what to say. Good.
The district attorney is looking for a new prosecuting attorney,
I said.
Criminal law?
 Walters sounded scandalized. Never mind that
his clients evaded the law sixteen ways to Sunday.
I nodded. 
You may consider this my notice.
 I stood. My legs
trembled. 
I was going to offer you two weeks, but since you
ve reassigned my casework it looks as though I
ll have time for a long lunch
this afternoon. I
ll sign my termination agreement today.
As I left the room I could hear them talking over each other. It
had not gone at all as they had planned, but then, it had not gone
as I had expected, either. I had been accused of ineptitude for which
my lover was guilty, not me. And now, oh God. Now I had to make
the job I had thrown at them mine. The job I had read about online
earlier that morning.
Why that job?
Because when I read the pay description and the location, I
thought, 
Who in their right mind would take this?
 Thus, it was
the first and only job I remembered when Walters and MacLittle
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
were playing bad cop, worse cop. That job, public prosecutor, had
the bonus of showing contempt for their culture of greed and lies. It
was perfect. The worst thing I could tell them.
Contrary to my claim, it took me two days to leave. I had to sign
many forms, in triplicate, that severed my connection to Walters,
MacLittle, and Tate. I handed off unfinished business to other associates, some smug-faced and superior, aware of my disgrace, others
worried, as if they too could be exiled to the South if they screwed
up. It was a quiet exit. No one threw me a farewell party. I packed
my Metropolitan Museum of Art calendar, my framed photographs,
law books, and the pot that held the long-ago-extinct plant I bought
my first day. I carried the box out of the office on July 10, 1999. The
box that is now #14.
I close the door on the closet and all it contains and retreat to
my bedroom where I move the diploma and artwork to my desktop.
These things are not safe on my bed. They could fall victim to my
restless arms, which reach out and search for things that elude me in
dreams, running too fast for me to catch.
Chapter Seven
July 3, 2000
This must stop, this dizzying d
 vu. Perhaps I could begin varying
my routine, or perhaps Carl could stop calling my home telephone
number every morning. Can
t he wait the twelve minutes it will
take for me to get to the office? Why does he need to track my
caseloads?
I set down the iron and examine my skirt. Wrinkle free. I wriggle
into the still-hot fabric, twisting in a parody of dance. When did I
last dance? My feet slide into the baby-powder-sprinkled interior
of my black leather heels. Maddie
s wedding, five months ago. I
danced to old favorites with the girls until my feet hurt and then I
took off my shoes and danced some more. Lacey threatened to hire
a lawyer if I stepped on her feet one more time. She claimed she
would seek emotional damages as well as physical. Why emotional?
Because it causes me great distress to know my best friend can
dance for shit,
 she told me.
Semidrunk and stomping to a beat unheard by any other person,
I smiled and said, 
re my best friend, too.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
My blue and white kitchen clock shows the little hand at seven,
the big hand at two. I
ll be at work by seven-thirty. My routine used
to deliver me to my office a half hour to an hour early. No wonder
Carl worries.
Today his call informed me that I have been appointed cocounsel in Ben
s case against Calvin Washington, a man accused of two
murders. Ben and I have never partnered on a case. If Jeffrey Barr
had not quit, if Ben had not been ill recently, and if Carl were not
scheduled to go to Bermuda soon, it would not have happened. I
imagine Ben
s reaction to the news of our impending teamwork.
He probably bellowed, 
Goldberg Junior? I
m babysitting Goldberg
Junior? The kid is barely out of diapers.
Legally speaking, he has a point. I have been practicing criminal
law for six months. This case will be my first murder trial. Until now aggravated assault, arson, armed robbery, and involuntary
manslaughter have composed my trial experiences. After several
fumbles and one explicit curse I wrench the childproof cap off a
bottle of antacids and chew three tablets. They leave chalky residue
on my teeth. I will have to brush again when I reach the office.
Coffee consumed, teeth clean, and e-mail reviewed and prioritized at eight-thirty a.m. By ten o
clock I have rid my desk of paperwork related to two closed cases and scheduled two meetings with
defense attorneys hoping to find me in a lenient mood.
Ben steps inside my office at ten thirty-five. His wide body manages to fill every crevice of space. 
Hello, Natalie,
 he says. I lean
back in my chair.
Good morning, Ben.
You have heard you will be assisting me on the Washington
case?
Yes. Cocounsel.
 I do not care for his word choice. Assisting, as
if I
m a first-year intern. 
I look forward to it.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
He rubs his beardless chin and rests his substantial weight on his
back foot. He looks at me as though he is in the market for a house
and I am a real fixer-upper. I allow myself the luxury of crossing my
stiff legs, which draws his gaze down in Pavlovian predictability.
Ben removes his reading glasses from his dress shirt pocket and
begins wiping at them with a handkerchief the size of a small tablecloth. 
This is your first murder trial?
 He knows it is.
I remember my first murder trial.
 He stops rubbing his glasses
and shifts his gaze to the bookcase, but he is not looking at the Georgia Code books; he is looking through them. 
People v. Drummond.
Man stabbed his wife and three children to death. Claimed the devil
made him do it.
 His low chuckle indicates what he thought of the
defense then and now. 
So I sent him to meet the fellow giving the
orders.
His brown eyes return to me. 
He went to the electric chair in
 His smile is wistful, as if remembering a love affair. 
ll be
seeking the death penalty.
Before I can protest or ask a question he adds, 
ll meet today
at three o
clock. My office.
 He is gone before I can recover.
The death penalty. My fingers trace the wood grain of Guvnor
desk. In junior high debate club I chose 
 in the debate on the
death penalty. In college I marched on the Capitol with the National
Coalition to Abolish the Death Penalty. I volunteered with Amnesty
International while in New York, working to convince states to impose moratoriums on capital punishment sentences. I am one of the
30 percent of Americans who think that killing convicted felons is
not the answer.
When I took this job I knew I might find myself in this position.
The 1973 Supreme Court decided in Furman v. Georgia to establish
a moratorium on death penalty sentences on the grounds that they
constituted cruel and unusual punishment. They were resurrected a
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
mere four years later in Gregg v. Georgia. Notice the common name
in these cases?
When I accepted this position I swore to uphold the Constitution of the State of Georgia. The decision to sentence a convict to
death is made by the jury and must be upheld by the judge. The decision to seek the death penalty is made by the prosecutor. It
s Ben
call. This time I forgo the antacids and reach for the aspirin.
Carl visits my office at eleven-thirty. He was 
just in the area.
His language implies he never intended to arrive anywhere or speak
to anyone in his entire life; connections are happy accidents to
Carl.
He stalks the perimeter of my office. He does not take note of
my stare. He is too busy pacing, looking for objects of interest that
are not there.
Can I help you, Carl?
 I do not want to help anyone right now,
but I want him to stop pacing. He is making me swimmy-headed,
the local term for 
dizzy.
You know about securities, right?
 He halts his long-legged
stride and turns his torso in a quick pivot that speaks of hours spent
on basketball courts. My admiration for his physical grace is tempered by concern for his expression. Carl
s ever-present apprehension
manifests itself in tics like pencil tapping, not in his appearance. He
always looks put together, assured. Now, however, his face is twisted
with worry, causing lines to appear about his forehead, eyes, and
mouth. His blue eyes are foggy.
I know about securities as they pertain to corporations.
His head bobs as if a puppeteer is pulling it from above. He
walks to my desk and sits in a chair without asking. Oh, dear. This
means trouble. Carl never takes a seat in my office without asking
first. His momma wouldn
t abide such manners.
Why do you want to know about securities?
 Carl handles
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
the sexual assault cases. How would a case of his relate to securities law?
He leans toward me, head poking forward and down, turtlelike.
I look to my open door and watch a paralegal pass by carrying two
reams of copy paper. Her gaze lingers on Carl. Nothing new there,
all the paralegals adore Carl. He is attractive, single, and, most important, he treats them well. I rise and close the door. I suspect
whatever he is about to unburden deserves a closed door.
s my sister,
 he begins, and the slow lingering of the word
sist-uh
 is more than Southern; it is love and despair in two syllables. His fingers wrestle each other as he tells me about Sarah, his
younger sister. She is twenty-eight and married, with two kids, Billy
and Lily, ages six and four. Her husband, William, works as a financial consultant at Hall Investments. A vein swells near Carl
s temple
and throbs purple against his hairline.
William beats Sarah.
 He lifts his head to stare at me.
He does not think William has abused the children, not yet, but
Sarah has visited the emergency room several times with stories of
household accidents. He has tried to convince her to leave William,
to take the children and go. She will not. His head sinks under the
weight of this burden.
Have the police been called?
 Sometimes neighbors alert the
police. Too many times they do not, believing that what happens
next door is none of their business.
Carl says it has happened twice but the cops have been persuaded
that the domestic misunderstanding was just that. His Macon police contacts are of little help. His sister lives in Savannah.
Why do you want to know about securities?
 I ask.
William is a snake.
 I sense Carl has substituted 
snake
 for a
word he deems unfit for my ladylike ears. 
I think he is involved in
illegal transactions, fraud. I have suspected it for some time, but I
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
t know much about that area.
 He shrugs. 
If I could find evidence that he has been abusing his clients
 accounts, charges could
be brought against him.
White-collar crime. I shake my head. Even if Carl
s brother-inlaw were convicted, the chances that he would serve time are slim.
Plus, he could be forced to forfeit assets, which could hurt Sarah
and the children financially.
s tough to prove fraud, especially on an individual level.
 This
t work. It
s too complex. I bounce my right shoe off and on my
heel, off and on. Didn
t Deidre Kendall from Smith start a domestic
abuse agency? Somewhere in Charleston? I wonder if she is listed on
the alumnae pages?
Natalie?
My shoe drops mid-bounce. I bend forward to retrieve and replace it. 
Sorry, I was thinking.
I could tell.
I want to help,
 I say, using my best Mrs. Graszcow voice. Mrs.
Graszcow was my second-grade teacher and the queen of lecturers,
stern but kind. 
But I don
t think this is the best way. Even if we
could prove fraud and he were convicted and sent away, the process
would take well over a year. And it
s very unlikely.
 He looks at me
as if I have trampled his sand castle.
I know some people involved with domestic abuse, in centers
and agencies. I could talk to them. See what they think. And maybe
I could meet her, your sister Sarah.
s not much, but it
s all I have,
and if I had more to offer it still might not be enough.
My mother volunteered at a shelter for domestic abuse victims
when I was too small to understand why the women who slept in
bunk beds, like at camp, were not overjoyed by the arrangements. I
played with children whose toys bore the marks of tough love: dolls
with severed limbs and stuffed animals with stains on their yellow
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
and blue fur. I think of those women, some of whom returned to
their homes after a week at the shelter, too scared by the prospect of
starting over to stay.
She might not leave him,
 I want to say, but I don
t because I
suspect he knows. Instead I make a note to track down Deidre and
contact her. My gaze slides over my calendar. July 3, the day before
Independence Day, a day to celebrate basic freedoms like life, liberty, and the right to not serve as someone
s punching bag.
Carl asks to borrow a pen. This show of etiquette reassures me.
He notes his sister
s name and address in a cramped, masculine print
and tells me that she stays at home with the children while William
works. 
Thanks, Nat, I mean Natalie.
 His tanned cheeks flush.
You can call me Nat.
 He rises from his chair. 
Everyone does.
Now it
s my turn to blush, because no one here refers to me as
anything but Natalie or Miss Goldberg. 
I mean, my friends and
family do.
He nods, fingers tapping his thighs, anxiety restored. 
You won
mention this to anyone?
 he asks, hand on the doorknob. 
I mean
No, I won
t say anything,
 I promise. Don
t worry, Carl. I can
keep a secret.
In law school they don
t teach you about keeping secrets. They
speak of client confidentiality, yes. And they talk of ethics, of morals, and of justice, never explaining that these concepts might be,
by their nature, incompatible. Defense attorneys adopt a 
ask, don
t tell
 policy regarding their client
s guilt. Prosecutors bargain with lesser criminals in attempts to catch bigger criminals.
Police present evidence gained using questionable methods and
procedures.
During the first criminal case I assisted on I spoke with a policeman who had discovered the bloodstained hammer used in an
assault. He said the hammer was found beside the suspect
s back
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
porch. The defendant claimed the hammer was locked in a closet
inside the house and that the house was searched after my policeman kicked the door in.
I can now recognize a 
TGTBT
 story, too good to be true, in
the first telling. Each such story recalls my father, who used to rant
against policemen beating confessions from suspects, of violating
their Miranda rights, of planting evidence. All violations of justice.
That hammer I mentioned? It was used on the legs and arms of
a fifteen-year-old who will always walk with a limp.
This work has shown me why cops with nicotine-stained hands
sometimes overstep boundaries. They want to see the guilty sent
away, to keep the rest of us safe, and they suspect playing by the
rules won
t get it done. I
m still sent running for a bottle of Maalox
when presented with a TGTBT story, but I am learning not to ask
questions when I sense the answers will not prove useful and lead to
nights of interrupted sleep.
I stop drawing circles on the paper before me. The tiny doodles
are symptomatic of excitement. I open a new notebook and begin
making a to-do list for Carl
s sister. My pen forms neat words, coherent thoughts. Inside, however, my mind chugs like a roller coaster
with too much fuel and no off switch. This is what I love: helping
people and solving puzzles. It
s what I always wanted to do.
Someone has installed a revolving door outside my office. This
would explain why foot traffic has tripled today. First Ben, then
Carl, Will
s secretary Janice, Phil from Victim
s Aid, and Trudy, a
temp who wanted the telephone number for the Georgia Bureau of
Investigation. Why she asked me I don
t know. Maybe because I
not the sort to send someone away. Yet how did she know?
When I arrived here I did not cultivate friends. I replied to any
and all personal questions with monosyllabic answers, offering
nothing more than was polite. Perhaps the ice has thawed. Perhaps
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
m not quite the bitch I was, if people are approaching me with
personal matters. Even Officer Wilkins
s teasing the other day had
a friendly banter to it, like kindergarten boys who pull your hair.
A glance at my watch shows I have seven minutes to collect my
thoughts and get to Ben
s office. My goodwill shatters into crystal
shards of annoyance.
I am prepared to reprise my role of bitch for Ben.
Chapter Eight
I had planned to drive to one of my three standard restaurants for
takeout, but instead I detour to Bruster
s Old Fashioned Ice Cream
and Yogurt. A line of people extends from the pink Formica counter
to the door with the tinkling bell. By the time I reach the front I
have read every flavor available four times. The list does not influence me to try anything new. I order a half-gallon of pink lemonade
sherbet and watch the high school girl behind the counter scoop
and smoosh the pale ice cream into the cardboard container. I settle
the tub in the deep hollow of my passenger seat and hope it doesn
melt into a pink puddle on the way home.
The ice cream and I make it without melting, though it
s a near
thing. The evening air
s humidity makes breathing aerobic exercise.
I huff and puff my way indoors where I stow the ice cream in the
freezer and change into my play clothes. I touch my sneaker toes
three times, then reach to the sky, my version of exercise. Then I
grab my keys and the ice cream and head next door to visit Mrs.
Dayton, my neighbor and gardening mentor.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Halfway there I remember to look for a rock. I squat low to the
ground and crab-walk along, stopping every few feet to pick up one.
Nope, too small. No, too ordinary. Near the end of the drive I spot
one. Pink quartz, if memory of high school geology serves me. I put
it in my shorts pocket and hurry because the ice cream container
has begun to sweat.
I wait atop the house
s side steps, the front door being for company and salesmen, not regulars such as myself. Two knocks are all it
takes to summon Mrs. Dayton, known to everyone as Lala. Her real
name is Evelyn, and even she cannot remember how the nickname
took. Something about a younger cousin with a lisp, she thinks.
Lala
s wrinkles smooth as a grin pulls her tanned face taut.
Natalie! Come in, come in.
 She waves one arm in circles, like an
airstrip worker signaling a plane. 
I was thinking of you this afternoon.
 I follow her through the photograph-lined entryway to the
kitchen where she takes the ice cream from me. 
Pink lemonade.
My favorite. Of course, you can only get it in the summer. I suppose if they had it year round it wouldn
t be as special.
 She sounds
unconvinced.
I suppose we will never know,
 I reply with mock gravity.
Lala smiles as she gathers two cherry-printed bowls and two
spoons. 
I shouldn
t eat so many sweets,
 she says, wrestling the top
off the ice cream. 
Duke is going to burn my ears when I see him.
Duke was her husband who died three years ago, killed in a car accident on Emery Highway. Lala often speculates about how he will
react to her behavior when he sees her in heaven.
She hands me a bowl, and I have to smother a laugh because
she took the bowl with the most sherbet. I pass through the dining
room whose prevailing decorating theme is doilies. Lala likes lace,
and hand-tatted all the dining room doilies herself. I had no idea
that the word for making doilies was 
 until she told me. She
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
said it often appears in crossword puzzles. Lala can complete the
New York Times Saturday crossword puzzle without cheating.
Stepping down Lala
s back stairs is like leaving earth for heaven.
The backyard has small footpaths running through tall stalks of colorful, sweet-smelling flowers. We walk to the middle of the garden,
where seating exists in the form of a bench and three Adirondack
chairs. The seats are gathered around a small pond filled with large
goldfish. Surrounding the pool are piles of stones donated by Lala
friends, a mosaic of memories. Some have traveled from as far away
as Thailand. I rest my bowl on the arm of the chair before fishing
the quartz from my pocket.
Lovely! Where
s it from?
 she asks as she settles it atop the other
rocks. For now, my quartz is King of the Hill.
I often pick up rocks around town. I once asked Lacey to send
me a rock from Central Park. She mailed a bright blue pebble along
with a note that said: I understand you miss the city, but a rock from the
park? Why not something more fitting, like a used condom or syringe?
I tell Lala it came from my driveway.
Perfect! The scene of our first meeting.
She is correct. Two days after my arrival in Macon I exited my
car to find a woman in a tangerine sundress with a blue-rinsed perm
standing at the edge of my driveway, clutching a bouquet of flowers.
I looked at her tanned, age-spotted face and thought, 
Not another
Jehovah
s Witness!
 I had suffered a visit from an elderly pair of
proselytizers the prior morning.
Lala told me that her first thought upon seeing me was, That
girl looks like she hasn
t seen the sun all summer. Better get her to
the garden. I allowed her to walk me there, expecting her to preach
about my eternal soul at any moment.
Lilies, hyacinths, asters, lilacs, myrtle, daisies, honeysuckle, sunflowers, roses, gardenias, all bloom in Lala
s sanctuary. I wonder if
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the fish swimming lazy circles realize how lucky they are to be surrounded by such beauty. Then I wonder if fish can smell or see
color, and if they can
t, are these fish any happier than fish imprisoned in pet store tanks?
s all about perspective. This oasis Lala has created feels special
because it is unlike every other part of my life. I wish my mother,
who loves gardening, would meet Lala and visit her garden, but that
would involve coming here and acknowledging that my job is more
than a temporary position. It would demand that my parents treat
my decision to come to Macon as something other than a descent
into temporary insanity.
Too bad. Mom would like Lala, admire her tenacity. Lala carries
twenty-pound bags of mulch in arms vivid with green-blue veins.
She winces after a full day of bending to plant, weed, water, and
prune, but shoos away the idea of a helper. 
They would pull up all
of the weeds,
 she said when I suggested she hire someone.
But you pull up weeds,
 I pointed out, knowing she did, because I had seen her pulling the gosh-darned weeds choking her
daisies and heard her scolding them.
Not all the weeds. I keep the ones I like.
 I should have known
that the woman who captures insects in her house and carries them
to safety outdoors (except those harmful to her garden) spares the
lives of her favorite weeds.
Under Lala
s tutelage I have learned more than I suspected there
was to know about flora. My mother, who tried to interest me in
gardening, would not recognize the child who said flowers were
boring in the woman kneeling in the dirt digging around visible
worms. This was another childhood objection I had to gardening:
s messy.
 I sigh, wishing messy was an area confined to dirt.
Messy applies to so many areas of my life, including my job.
I had known my three o
clock meeting with Ben wouldn
t go
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
well. It might have helped if I had not begun by asking, 
Why capital punishment?
 Ben spoke for five minutes about public safety, the
victim
s family
s sense of closure, and recidivism.
I breathed in and out of my nose, refusing to get involved in a
debate. 
What I meant was why are we seeking the death penalty
on this case?
Calvin Washington committed felonious murder. The aggravating circumstances involved compel us to seek the strictest justice.
His sonorous delivery raised suspicions that he was auditioning a
piece of his opening speech for me.
What aggravating circumstances are you citing?
Ben rocked in his chair, a motion made easier by his excess
thirty pounds. A smile separated his lips to reveal a mouth full
of teeth that could benefit from a bleaching or two. 
Why, Natalie, you don
t mean to tell me you are not familiar with Title 42,
Chapter 5, Section 85 of the Georgia Code detailing aggravating
circumstances?
I am.
Then you should have no trouble listing them.
 The smile grew
wider. I glared at his lips. He could not be serious. 
I realize you
still new to our humble state but it might be nice if you learned the
laws.
That did it. I recited all ten aggravating circumstances in a flat
monotone that implied I could have gone on to recite the Georgia
Code in its entirety if I felt so inclined.
Once you have reviewed the files I am sure you will have no
trouble identifying which factors we will be citing.
 He slid a file
box marked 
J. Barr-Washington
 to the edge of his desk, just out of
s reach. He wasn
t going to give me an inch, on anything. The
reminder of Jeffrey
s defection made me wonder if working with
Ben was what drove him away.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I have escaped too, for now, to a place without tension. Shifting
my legs, I sigh. I envy Lala
s fish their simple lives.
Sounds like you
ve had yourself a day,
 she observes. I squirm,
aware that I have not said two words since we came out here. Some
guest I am.
m sorry, Lala. It has been quite a day.
She chuckles. 
You know what would make you feel better?
look down at my empty sherbet bowl, amazed. I was not aware that
I had been lifting the spoon to my mouth. Her chuckle deepens.
Not more sherbet. Planting. I
ve got some impatiens I need to put
in this evening. I was waiting for the ground to cool.
I rise from my chair, anxious to help. Lala is in good health, but
I worry that she might overexert herself. Planting the flowers, however, turns out to require little effort. We dig small holes in the soil,
settle the impatiens into their new homes, and sprinkle them with
water. Lala sings a medley of Frank Sinatra tunes. She claims the
flowers dig Sinatra. I hum along, unsure of the words.
There is dirt on my knees, on my hands, and, according to Lala,
on my face, but I don
t care. I rest my butt on the heels of my sneakers and sigh, a happy sigh this time. 
Will these bloom every year?
I am slow to learn perennials and annuals.
Nope.
 She rinses her spade with a stream of water from the
watering can and replaces it in its appointed garden toolbox slot.
These will stay around until October or so and then pfft !
 She taps
the earth around the base of one of the new flowers.
That
s not very long.
Some flowers do not last long, but it makes their time in the
garden that much more special, in a way. Nothing lasts forever.
wonder if she is thinking of her husband.
Do you suppose they go to flower heaven?
 I might as well have
asked if she believed in fairies.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
She doesn
t laugh. She places the watering can beside the tools.
Flowers decompose and become part of the earth and in turn fertilize other flowers. That
s a sort of afterlife. The same for trees and
bugs and animals. Duke would accuse me of blasphemy for saying
so, but I
m not sure a body needs any other kind of heaven. Giving
life to a rose isn
t so bad. A person could do worse.
 She stares about
her, at the vivid colors made brighter by the settling darkness.
I squeeze her spotted hands twice. She stands near my own five
feet and three inches, the years pulling her closer to the earth, an
irresistible magnet. 
Thank you,
 I say.
Anytime, Natalie.
I leave by the gate. Looking at the purple blossoms beside the
white wood fence I think of Lala
s afterlife. It would appear her
heaven allows nonbelievers inside. Not a bad deal for those lacking
faith, or those who have mislaid it. Images of Temple Beth Shalom
return to me: the lions flanking the two stone tablets above the Holy
Ark, the siddur
s thin, fragrant pages, rows of male heads covered by
small black discs.
How long has it been since I have been to temple? Years. Would
I be able to follow the service if I returned? Would I feel capable of
declaring God
s Holiness with the congregation during the Kedushah? Or would I have to admit that my conversations with God,
like those with my parents, have become infrequent and painful?
Just in case, I think, touching the mezuzah hanging outside the
doorframe of my back door. I kiss the fingers that touched it. Just
in case.
Chapter Nine
July 13, 2000
I can
t be wrong on this. Please, God, do not let me be wrong on
this. Ten minutes ago I challenged Ben on a point of law regarding
Georgia
seven deadly sins
 parole legislation. His phone rang as
we argued. He said he had to take the call. I have jogged to my office
to check. If I am wrong it
s crow pie for a week. Who am I kidding?
My diet will be crow, crow, crow for life, life, life.
My fingers speed-type on my keyboard, fueled by adrenaline
and fear. 
Please be right,
 I whisper under my breath, over and
over, turning it into a chant. I process the query and wait for
the results. Aha! It was established January 1, 1995. I knew it! A
constitutional amendment effective January 1,1995, all but abolished parole for Georgia
s seven most violent crimes known as
the 
deadly sins.
 Murder, rape, kidnapping, armed robbery, aggravated sodomy, aggravated sexual battery, and aggravated child
molestation. Each carries a minimum sentence of ten years without parole. I knew it was 1995, not 1994. A loud splatter of rain
draws me to the window. I smile. The rain may be falling with
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
monsoon intensity outside my window, but in my office it is a
sunshine day.
Ben has been nipping at me all week, questioning my knowledge
of law, of jury selection, of lunch choices. He dislikes sushi. Worse is
that I have found him better versed on the first two. Ben scorns the
concept of professional jury consultants, who recommend which
jurors to keep and which to dismiss during voir dire, but he is familiar with their tactics and has read the latest literature pertaining
to their work. I assumed he dismissed all things on personal bias. It
appears he does not, though he did tell me he wouldn
t eat raw fish
prepared by Japs if the president of the U.S. asked him to. Good
old Ben. I didn
t point out that his belly might benefit from more
California rolls and fewer cheeseburgers.
I shuffle my way back to his office, doing a half-dance of glee.
Will, passing by, brown-green eyes ringed with circles, blinks twice
and says, 
Natalie?
 I smile but don
t break stride. 
Are you doing
the Hustle?
 he asks, causing heads to pop out of cubicles like jackin-the-boxes. All eyes are on me.
No way,
 I shout. 
The Electric Slide.
 My grin does not waver
as I shuffle the remainder of the way to Ben
s door. My knock is
perfunctory. I have half my torso inside his office when I see he is
not alone. I
m stuck. A petite blonde sits opposite Ben, her hands
clenching his. Her nails are lacquered cotton-candy pink and she
wears two rings: one small gold band on her left ring finger and a
sapphire ring on her right middle finger. She cocks her head toward
me, and the motion, combined with her small dark eyes, reminds me
of a sparrow. She has the bone structure: thin, little, easy to break. I
retreat with a quick 
m sorry
 and head for the ladies
 room.
The doors hang open on all three stalls. No one is primping before the mirror or washing their hands. It
s just me. Should I return
to my office and wait for Ben to find me? Or should I check to
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
see if the blonde is gone? Under yellow-green lights that make me
look jaundiced, I rub at a small speck of mascara that has migrated
south, below my lower lashes. I wonder who she is. The way her
hands gripped his, as if holding on to a life preserver. His wife? I
wag my head at the mirror girl. Just because she seemed intimate
doesn
t mean she is his wife. You ought to know that, I reprimand
myself.
The other woman, that
s what I was, for twenty months, Henry
Tate
s mistress. I worked with him for five months on the case that
introduced us. During tutorials on structured transactions and manipulating financial statements I received, gratis, lessons on desire.
Hiding my longing from Henry became a task more difficult than
reconciling multiple Forms 3, 4, and 5 for our biggest clients. In
the end, my efforts failed. My too obvious face, the one Katherine
liked to draw, gave me away. A week after the SEC investigation of
our client ended, Henry invited me to the Michelangelo Hotel
lobby for drinks. When I saw he sat alone on a red-patterned sofa,
sipping Scotch, I tried to act surprised. When he handed me my
martini his long fingers caressed mine. I stared at the etched lines
of his knuckles, the dark hairs on the back of his hand, so fine they
were almost invisible.
He had the room card in his wallet. I followed him into a red
and brass elevator and down a hallway with carpet so thick our feet
made no sound as we walked. Inside the room I stared at the buttons
on Henry
s blue shirt, unable to look at his face, not ready. When
his fingers crept into the hairs at the bottom of my scalp, massaging,
I knew he saw it all: the desire, the guilt, the fear, the hope, the joy.
The brush of coolness against my scalp, the hard metal of Henry
wedding band, did not jolt me from my sexual dream. I arched up
and back and he whispered my name and Natalie was no longer
a singsong of syllables used to summon me to the kitchen table. I
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
was reborn, bathed in Henry
s kisses and given a new name, a longdrawn-out sigh. Nat-ah-leeee.
Standing before him, dizzy with sex and power, I forgot that I
had ever worn pigtails or braces or training bras. I felt as if I had
been born full woman, Athena from Zeus
s brow, with heavy breasts
and dark pubic hair as curly as that atop my head. I focused on the
serpent of feeling rearranging itself within me, twining closer to my
damp vagina. When Henry stripped me bare of all my clothes, of
the lace panties I wore because I planned for every eventuality, I lay
atop the semicool sheets and brought him to me and in me with my
right hand, the same hand I used to write with, to carry heavy bags
and to masturbate with. And then he knew everything, everything
no one else knew. I screamed. It hurt, and even as my flesh resisted,
I thought this is how it should be. It shouldn
t be easy.
Adultery. In one moment, I broke multiple Commandments.
But that first morning, lying within the cave of Henry
s chest, I did
not wonder if his wife was worried, or if he told her he was away on
business. I marveled that the rhythmic drumming of his heart could
dance against my spine. The woman he had pledged his devotion to
was somewhere else and I kept her away from my mind as long as I
could. It was not as hard as it should have been.
I met Henry
s wife once, at the firm
s holiday party, held at Windows on the World, atop the World Trade Center. I had not begun
working with Henry yet. I spent much of the party staring out the
windows, looking at the Statue of Liberty, remote atop her pedestal.
During one of these moments, a respite from discussions of plans
with coworkers about the holidays, a voice said, 
Is it time to go
yet?
 Without turning I knew the speaker was female and beautiful.
You could hear it in her voice, the expectation of agreement.
She was lovely. Fine boned, her pale hair swept up in a loose chignon, the kind that could never hold my wild hair. She wore a long
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
black dress and a bright diamond choker. I smiled at her apparent
disdain for the party while considering whether she ever ate dessert.
Her shoulders looked as sharp as her cheekbones.
This thing seems to get worse each year.
 She swallowed a
mouthful of champagne to emphasize her point.
m sorry. Do you work for the firm?
 I couldn
t believe I would
have missed another female lawyer, especially one this attractive.
Lord, no. My husband, Henry, does. He
s over there.
 She gestured with her drinking hand, a quick movement. I had no hope of
identifying her husband from the crowd of suited half-drunk men.
s a nice view,
 I offered, casting a pitying glace at Lady Liberty, forgotten and unloved.
The woman stared out the wall of windows, but I sensed she
saw nothing but her own reflection. 
I hate heights,
 she said, and
then, as 
We Wish You a Merry Christmas
 began sounding from
the band, 
and I loathe Christmas carols.
I like them,
 I confessed before adding, 
m Jewish
 as if that
excused me.
Huh.
 She took another long swallow of champagne. 
Hilary.
Natalie.
 Inspired by the song, I told her, 
It means born on
Christmas. My name.
How funny.
 Her face tightened with thought. 
Did your parents know?
m sure. They named me after my grandmother.
I don
t think she heard me. She glared at the band as they segued
into 
Winter Wonderland.
I think it
s high time to leave.
 She set her empty glass on the
table beside us. 
It was nice meeting you.
Nice meeting you, too,
 I replied, though she was several feet
away by then.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I recognized the woman in Henry
s silver-framed photograph
atop his desk. Hilary, the beauty from the holiday party. It made his
desire for me more amazing. That he possessed her and wanted me.
Funny little me with my dimpled elbows and wild hair. To think I
was better than her made me rich with power, heady with lust. It
also made me sick with guilt, at first, but I developed a tolerance
over time.
My patience, however, still needs work, as seen by my current
situation. I extend and contort my neck to peer through the small
slit of Ben
s open door. He looks up and sees me. 
Are you going to
spy on me all day?
I wasn
t spying.
 I am appalled by how much I sound like a
sullen six-year-old. 
I did not want to interrupt you and your . . .
visitor.
My wife, Jenny.
 Ben seems amused by my discomfort.
Oh. She
s very pretty.
 I can
t think of anything else to say.
I think so. Now about the physical evidence. I have scheduled
a meeting with officers Wilkins and Cox. They handled the case.
ll call Cox to testify.
Why not Wilkins?
Because Cox is older.
Yes, and Wilkins is blacker.
 Ben doesn
t argue this. Cox is
white. I tell him, 
If we are going death penalty on this you don
want a suggestion of racism. The defendant is black. So were the
victims. Introduce the white cop and the white lawyers and, hell,
why not an all-white jury, and you have yourself a problem. If we
win the conviction, there may be an appeal. Better to have no suggestion of
Ben interrupts, 
Defense has been trying to play the race card.
During the appeals hearing, Landry argued that the state flag symbolized the history of racism and that its presence in the court would
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
influence jurors.
 Ben
s voice leaves little doubt how he felt about
this argument. I don
t say anything about the Confederate battle
flag that dominates the state flag and how uncomfortable it makes
me. There has been talk of changing it, but it
s amounted to nothing
more than that.
I think he may have been using the flag as a decoy.
 His voice
grows warmer. 
He pushed to have Washington appear in civilian
clothes, arguing that the jumpsuit and shackles reinforced a false
presumption of guilt.
What happened?
 I was not present for the unified appeal
hearing. Ben had handled it, and Jeffrey aided him. That was in
mid-May, while I toiled to convict robbers and drunk drivers, not
murderers.
The unified appeal hearing marks a sea change in our legal system. Death row inmates once possessed many chances to reverse
their sentence, complicating and lengthening the appeals process.
Georgia adopted a unified appeal system that gathers all the issues
on which a defendant can appeal into one document. This document can be brought to the state and federal appellate courts only
once. Ben is implying that Landry, lead defense counsel, brought a
laundry list. With a client facing death, one could hardly expect him
to do otherwise.
Washington can wear a suit, but he will be shackled. The
judges pointed out that Washington was accused of two murders
and shouldn
t be allowed to blend in with other civilians.
 Score
one for us.
After a moment Ben says, 
We will get Wilkins to testify.
My euphoria is severed by anxiety. I hope Wilkins does not discover I am the reason he is testifying. He won
t thank me for the
honor.
You sure are going great guns at this for someone who pro63
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
fesses to hate the death penalty.
 He stares at me as if he expects
me to come clean and confess that I
m only masquerading as a lefty
liberal.
I don
t endorse a terminal punishment in a system of justice
that is flawed. Mistakes get made. Wrongful convictions do happen.
But my issues with the death penalty are just that, my issues. I am
not going to jeopardize this case because of its possible outcome. I
would not do that.
 I direct a steady gunslinger stare at him while
I talk.
He issues a loud 
humph.
re meeting with Wilkins and
Cox tomorrow at eleven.
I have an arraignment at eleven.
 Why does it never occur to
him to check with me before he schedules meetings?
He glares at me through his thick glasses. 
ll see if they can
push it back. Would one o
clock be possible?
art eich?
 Oh, man, he has driven me to mumbling in
Yiddish.
What?
Anytime after noon will be fine.
 Asshole.
Fine. I will let you know when the meeting is scheduled. Until
then, you have the files? Review the crime-scene report before we
meet.
 As if I need him to explain how to prep for a meeting.
I am halfway out of Ben
s door when I pause to say, 
Oh, Ben?
Yes?
 He slaps the papers he was reading onto his desk.
The seven deadly sins legislature was enacted on January 1,
1995, meaning that the first class of graduates will be released in
2005, not 2004. Just thought you would want to know. Best to keep
current on these things.
I leave with the last word still vibrating on my lips, tasting sweeter
than sugar.
Chapter Ten
Blood appears shiny and black in photographs when still fresh, so
I know Marcus Rhodes was not dead long when the crime scene
photographer took these snapshots. A puddle of black pools about
his beaten face, a pulpy, bruised thing, a third missing where two
bullets tore through it. Marcus
s long body is twisted, hands underneath his back where Calvin Washington tied them before he
beat Marcus. The two nine-millimeter bullets killed him, not the
baseball bat. The murder was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible,
or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an aggravated battery to the victim. Okay, Ben, I assume we will be citing
this along with The murder was committed while the offender was
engaged in the commission of another capital felony, aggravated battery,
burglary, or arson in the first degree. It doesn
t get much more aggravated than battery by bat.
I forgive myself for waiting to look at these photographs. Though
I should have reviewed them sooner, I knew the stark images would
settle like silt to the bottom of my mind, ready to be stirred again
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
to the surface by another future case. I exhale through my nose, a
breathing trick that is supposed to center me by making me concentrate on my own breath. All it does is make me more aware that the
people before me cannot breathe. I breathe through my mouth and
lift the last photograph of Marcus.
In this photo there is less shiny black liquid pooled about the
corpse, and no signs of beating, but there is a hole in the small chest
that should not be there. Dominic Brown, a student at Burke Elementary School. The school where Marcus Rhodes worked as a janitor, where Calvin Washington hunted him down. Calvin threatened
to kill Marcus days earlier because Marcus had ridiculed Calvin
s favorite sports team, the Washington Redskins. Why did he kill little
Dominic? Our best guess is he interrupted Calvin
s vengeance.
I squint at the photo. Small black boy, lying dead. Familiar
somehow. From the news? No. When Ben first talked of the case
I realized it came in while I was out sick with the office flu. The
small outcry that accompanied these murders, the rush to arraign
the murderer, all had happened while I lay sniffling in bed, my arms
too heavy and achy to move more than a few inches.
I lift the photo and regard the second. 
I don
t know why she
swallowed the fly.
 The song is in my head before I realize, before
clarity drops my mouth open. Dominic. Dominic Brown. The kid
from the Piggly Wiggly, pocketing gum, pretending to be a magician. Oh God.
I look at all six photographs. Yes, the curly hair and dark face,
the small, quick hands. Not quick enough. Not capable of stopping
bullets. I grab the reports. Why was he there?
According to a friend, Dominic had returned to school after it
closed to retrieve a vocabulary list he needed for a spelling test the
next day. Dominic snuck in the building through a half-open window
near the gymnasium; his size-six sneakers left imprints beneath the
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
sill. He never reached his locker. That required passing by the room
where Marcus Rhodes lay screaming, begging, sobbing. Maybe Dominic thought he could help the man in trouble. Instead, he received
a slug in the chest, ensuring that he would never learn how to spell
moustache.
 The vocabulary list is in a folder. I wonder if and how
Ben plans to use it. It could prove an effective tool, gaining the jurors
sympathy. So cold, part of me thinks, acknowledging my analytic
mind. Necessary, I think. Weeping at my desk isn
t going to bring
Dominic or Marcus back and it won
t put their murderer away.
Marcus died second, or so they think. I imagine the bullets were
a mercy, an end to the torment of the baseball bat that left splinters
in his skull. You can see them in the close-ups, poking out like misplaced porcupine quills.
I read Emily Brown
s statement. I can see her: the raindrops on her
curls, her camel coat and small navy purse. She did not know her son
had snuck out of the house. She admitted she would have punished
him for forgetting his vocabulary list. He had done it twice before
that same month. She would have grounded him and insisted he not
play video games for a week. What this report omits is all that Emily
Brown would give to have her son back, which is everything.
I smooth the sheet of paper as if I could take out the terrible
wrinkles and make it whole. I cannot. All I can do is see that Calvin Washington pays for the crimes he committed. Reshuffling the
photographs, I catch a glimpse of something I missed. There is a
small matchbox car to the right of Dominic Brown
s corpse. He was
carrying it when Calvin Washington shot him. Did the tiny wheels
of the car spin when they were jerked from his hand? I imagine the
wheels spinning and in that hypnotic rotation I envision Calvin
Washington strapped to a chair of death. The image does not disturb me. 
I guess he
ll die.
 The words surprise me. I did not intend
to sing them, to think them, but there they are. 
I guess he
ll die.
Chapter Eleven
July 14, 2000
Friday night. Free at last. From my worn chintz seat I stare about my
living room at the sofa, oversized chair, coffee table, television, ministereo, and a collection of end tables I cannot part with although I
realize that five is too many for one room. The sofa
s unblemished
pale blue corduroy reveals that it is used for guest seating and that
guests to my house are infrequent. I stare at my hazy reflection in
the television
s dead screen. I look limp, an abandoned rag doll.
Only my hands are busy. One grasps a glass of iced tea, the other
a telephone. I am prepared to leave a message. When a voice says,
Hello?
 I almost spill my drink.
Lacey?
Nat? Nat! How are you?
 Her voice spikes with happiness. I tilt
my head back to alleviate the pressure. Lacey
s joy makes me ache.
s been that kind of day, that kind of week, that kind of life.
m okay.
 I hesitate, then exhale. 
No, I
m lying. I
m not.
Goodness, are they teaching you how to lie down there? How
very unlawyerly.
 Her teasing is familiar but the subject matter
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
scratches like wool. I can never forget that the first casualty in my
affair with Henry was Lacey. My first real lie told to her.
She had come downtown on an errand and swung by my office
building to see if I wanted to have lunch. A surprise. She intercepted
me as I was leaving the building with Henry. His hand rested lightly
on the small of my back. It might have appeared mere chivalry.
She smiled and explained she was just in the neighborhood. I introduced her to Henry. His glance didn
t miss an inch of Lacey
lean frame, her golden hair, or her feline green-yellow eyes. It didn
bother me. Years of Lacey had inured me to the stares she garnered.
She returned his gaze with frank curiosity and I could see her puzzling over him and who he was to me.
We invited her to join us for lunch but she declined. As she said
nice meeting you
 to Henry I saw her look at his wedding ring.
Her look at me asked, What are you doing, Nat? My unwavering
smile and guilt-free face lied, Nothing, Lacey. I
m just having lunch,
that
s all. How could she know my transparent emotions had, in the
course of my affair, become opaque? She later told me she knew I
couldn
t lie and she didn
t expect I would, not to her. But I did, and
she knows, and it hurts us both, still.
So what
s wrong?
 Lacey asks, and I inhale, exhale, and inhale
again before I can speak. Where to start?
ve got my first murder trial coming up.
But you
ve only been practicing for . . . how long?
Seven months. I
m only cocounsel. The original cocounsel, Jeffrey, quit the DA without so much as a by-your-leave. There are
rumors that the pressure got to him. So I
m playing catch-up on a
capital case. Ben Maddox is first chair.
t he the jerk who said that women ought to take the leave
part of maternity leave to heart and stay home until their children
go to college?
 Her memory astonishes me sometimes.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Yeah.
 I pull a curl from beside my ear because it tickles. I
stretch the lock of hair until it can go no farther. Fully extended,
it looks semistraight. I release it and the hair bounces back. 
death penalty case.
Holy shit.
 She blurts the words.
You can say that again.
Well, honey, I can
t say that you lead a quiet life. My God.
Death penalty.
 I can see Lacey
s wrinkled brow; she
s reviewing all
she knows on the death penalty. Her next question isn
t procedural,
but personal. 
How is the family taking the news?
They don
t know.
 I am matter-of-fact.
Not really their cup of tea,
 I offer, failing at lightheartedness.
I hope the death penalty isn
t anybody
s cup of tea, but . . .
What?
Well, not to be a bitch
I smile, awaiting Lacey
s pronouncement
but your dad never clears his cases with you, does he? I
mean, he doesn
t always represent people you would want to lunch
with.
This is an understatement. When I was twelve my father represented a local skinhead who displayed an enormous swastika on his
front lawn and who leafleted cars and buildings with white-supremacy messages. Members of our synagogue asked my father why he had
to represent a hateful man who embraced the very principles that had
led to the murder of so many of their family members in Europe. My
father said that everyone deserved the same First Amendment freedom-of-speech protections, no matter how offensive their message
may appear. He explained why the man deserved representation, but
avoided the real question. Why did he have to represent him?
I sigh and scissor my legs up and down. 
Yeah, I
m not sure raising that point is going to win Mom and Dad over.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
When is the trial?
Not for a while. The unified appeals hearing took place two
months ago, but we have to get a grand jury indictment before it
goes to court for trial. It will be a couple of months.
 I sigh. 
I saw
one of the victims once, before he was killed. Well, obviously,
add. 
He was only nine years old.
Next time I start bitching about proofreading errors, feel free
to slap me.
 Lacey works as an assistant editor in a publishing firm.
Typos make her crazy; they always have.
The other troubling matter was the false Henry apparition, but
I cannot speak of this. Lacey loathes Henry. She holds him responsible for the derailment of my career, the destruction of my dreams,
and for taking me away from New York and her. In her world,
blame must be assigned and the guilty party punished. She should
have been the public prosecutor.
So other than work, how is Georgia?
Peachy.
She laughs, a full, throat-warbling laugh. 
Good one, Nat.
 And
then, 
So have you met anyone lately?
 Here is where I do not tell
her that I do not trust myself to meet anyone else.
I meet men all the time at work.
Yummy.
Yeah, except I
m usually trying to convict them of crimes.
I retract my yummy comment. Oh, but speaking of yummy,
want to hear about my latest dating adventure? It began outside
the Twenty-third Street Krispy Kreme.
 Lacey and doughnuts, like
peanut butter and jelly, a duo for the ages.
Do tell.
 I scrunch down farther in the chair and let my head
rest against the arm.
So I
d just come from a run
In the park?
 I interrupt.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Yeah, and
But the park is sixty blocks north of there.
 I know by 
park
she means 
Central.
Yeah, but after doing my loop I was still feeling antsy so I decided to shake it up and run downtown a ways.
 Sixty blocks. Approximately four miles. And this after she ran three miles. Insane.
So then I start heading to the West Side, and I realize my feet
are leading me to Krispy Kreme, so I decide that my feet are geniuses and I obey and when I get there, of course, I
m a big, sweaty
mess.
 No she wasn
t. She was a lean running machine with heightened color and a dewy glow. 
And when I get there there
s this guy
standing outside looking at the hot now sign, which is unlit. He
stares at it like it holds some sort of secret message, which made me
think he might be nuts. But he was very cute.
So you spoke to him.
Of course. I mean, his attention was focused on that sign. He
wasn
t noticing anything around him.
 Including you, I almost say,
but don
t. Guys who ignore her intrigue Lacey because very few
men do.
So I say, 
Well, the hot now sign is off, but if you go inside, the
sort of warm now sign is on.
 And he turns to look at me and he is
twenty times hotter than I thought and he says, 
s ten-fifteen. The
sign always goes on at ten. I
ve been waiting.
 Then I start thinking, okay, he is superfine but he seems a little too committed to the
Krispy Kreme clock, and perhaps I should return to my original
opinion of crazy.
So I am about to enter the building when I hear him scream
Yes! Yes! I win!
 behind me and I turn around and the sign is on and
he is jumping up and down like a child.
Certifiable,
 I remark.
Then he turns to me and explains that he read an article about
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the Krispy Kreme dynasty and how all the chains are regulated to
operate in a certain fashion, including when the hot now sign goes
on. But knowing New York, he figured the Twenty-third Street store
would break the system at some point, so he and a friend made a bet
on how long it would take for the system to fail. They picked the
midmorning time and alternated vigils. Todd, that
s the guy
s name,
was closest to the actual day.
Does he have a job?
 I ask, wondering how anyone would have
the free time to develop such a theory, much less explore it.
Yeah, he works for the Peace and Social Justice Division of the
Ford Foundation.
Nice. Very nice.
Yeah, a man after your own heart. Fixing the world.
So what happened after you determined he didn
t belong in a
rubber room?
I went inside for some doughnuts, and he came in, too. He
ordered three sour-cream doughnuts.
 I have no doubt this meant
something to Lacey. Divination by doughnut. 
I sat down to eat mine
and he sat across from me like he had known me from kindergarten
and then he proceeds to tell me about Lou
s Donuts in San Jose and
how their maple-glazed cake doughnuts alone are worth the trip.
Sure, a trip of three thousand miles for a doughnut.
He did say it would be more worthwhile if you had business or
family in the area. He does. Have family in the area, I mean.
So you bonded over doughnuts. What then?
Well, I needed to get back to my place and shower, so I said
it was nice meeting you and made leaving noises and motions
and I thought he wasn
t going to do anything. I mean, he just sat
there, watching me through his glasses.
 Aha. Lacey is a sucker for
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
men in glasses. 
And I get up to go and he says, 
Do you like to
dance?
re kidding.
 This is providential. Lacey loves dancing like
she loves doughnuts.
I said, 
Actually, yes,
 and he sighs and says that will make the
invitation he is about to extend more attractive, and I
m thinking
what invitation? So then Todd invites me to this event featuring the
Hubbard Street Dance Company, which was just awarded a grant
by the Ford Foundation. There will be dinner, a show by the company, and then dancing.
Did you accept?
Yes, but I
m a little nervous. It
s going to be splashy. I don
know what to wear, and I barely know the guy.
When is it?
 Logistics are important to me.
Next Friday night at the Ritz-Carlton, in their ballroom.
So what does he look like?
Handsome, in that bookish way I love. Glasses. Blue eyes.
Brown hair that
s curly. Built, from what I could see. When he
jumped up and down I got an eyeful of abs.
I laugh at the idea of Lacey checking out a guy she suspected
might be crazy. 
Atta girl,
 I tell her and add, 
You should wear that
long black dress with the strappy back.
You think? It won
t be too dressy?
Can you be overdressed in Manhattan?
True enough. The strappy black dress it is. That means heels.
Good thing he
s tall.
re going to have a great time. Hey, if the crazy doughnut
guy doesn
t work out, you can check out the dancers.
Good idea.
Lacey deserves a good time.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Hey Lacey, do you know if Deidre Kendall still runs a domestic
abuse shelter?
I think so. No wait, yes, she does. I met someone recently who
knew her and she said she still did. In Charleston. Why?
ve got a domestic abuse victim in need of help. It
s a colleague
sister and he asked for my assistance. I told him I would see what I
could do, and I thought maybe I would talk to Deidre and see what
advice she has.
Run and don
t look back.
 Lacey sighs. 
The world is a crap
place sometimes, isn
t it?
You can say that again.
You want me to get Deidre
s phone number and address for
you?
That would be great. I feel guilty because I haven
t done anything yet and I promised I would try to help.
 Even I can hear the
expectation of failure in my voice.
re such a good person.
 Her tone implies that she, by contrast, is a disciple of Satan. 
ll get the info to you tomorrow.
 She
sighs, deep and long and low. 
I wish you still lived here. I spilled
coffee on my new skirt and there was no one to tally my klutz points
or offer me chocolate comfort.
 Lacey has accidents on a regular basis. I kept a running tally and even devised a rating system based on
the degree of injury involved. Sometimes we would seek chocolate
comfort to make her boo-boos better.
I miss you, too. Call me after your big date and let me know
how it went.
I will. Love you, Nat.
Love you, Lace.
Bye.
I am alone again in my apartment. Staring at the ceiling, I appreciate that Lacey is able to take me out of myself, to wholly entertain
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
and distract me. I tilt my head to the side to examine a small crack,
just near the corner, or is that a cobweb? Lacey makes me less selfconscious whereas Henry made me self-aware every moment I spent
with him. It was a bit exhausting. I suppose it
s just as well that if I
had to lose one of them it was Henry. Yes, it is a cobweb. And you
know, it
s obvious. If I lost one of them it would have to be Henry
because Lacey would never abandon me, and that is what he did.
There were no telephone calls, no visits, no apologies. After I left
the firm, I checked my answering machine and e-mail every half
hour. By month
s end I had hired movers to pack up and haul my
belongings 950 miles south.
I managed to secure the job I had used to retaliate against those
men: Walters, MacLittle, and Tate. Most especially Tate, who I
knew did not believe me when I said I got a position as a prosecutor
in Georgia. He thought he knew me too well. Knew the scar by my
knee where I fell off my bike, knew my favorite ice cream
pistachio
and knew when I was bluffing about relocating to work in
an unknown land. Getting the job had involved exaggerating my
criminal law experience (clerking while in school) and calling on
a favor from an old family friend, Walter Owens. In the seventies
he and my dad had battled corrupt landlords and racist policemen
together. Then my dad began getting some high-profile civil rights
cases and Walter went his own way. He remembered me in pigtails
and seemed surprised, though delighted, to hear from me.
He had moved to Georgia in 1985, and had risen to the ranks
of judge in Atlanta. He said he would see what he could do. I hated
asking for this favor, but not as much as I would hate not doing it.
I had to do this, to prove I could.
On moving day I stood inside my empty Manhattan apartment
and turned around once, committing the water-stained wood near
the radiator and beautiful glass doorknobs to memory, afraid I
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
might forget it all. I walked to my living room window and looked
ten stories below to where summer-clad people hurried to their airconditioned buildings. I exited my apartment and slammed the
door, which set Mrs. Powalski
s terrier to barking like a mad thing.
I shrugged as I walked past. I wouldn
t have to worry about Mrs.
Powalski complaining about the noise level anymore, or her terrier,
Henry James, who was noisier than any human in the building.
Four days after I moved, a package arrived from New York. Inside was a 1949 copy of Sidney Lanier
s The Marshes of Glynn and a
note. Dearest Natalie, I am so very sorry. I hope you are able to forgive
me someday. Yours, Henry. I cried until my nose ran and then I cried
some more. After I had wet half a box of tissues, I picked up the
book to throw it across the room, but my arm held still. It wasn
the book
s fault.
The package made me look for the photograph I had hidden inside my bedroom table. It was taken at an inn in upstate New York,
during a rare stolen weekend. In it, we are seated together on a small
bench on the inn
s porch. Henry looks somber, his dark eyes wary,
his posture rigid. I smile like a first-grader getting her school picture
taken. That we are together is visible in our proximity, the way our
bodies lean together, but that we are not truly together is visible in
every other detail: his lack of smile, my too-bright grin, his hands
gripped together, my own resting on my thighs, uncertain where to
be if not around his torso, holding on.
Chapter Twelve
July 20, 2000
Carl and I have decided that a weekday is best. William will be
working, and Carl
s sister Sarah will be home with the children. I
have driving directions, a road map, a bottle of water, and an orange
that is making my car
s interior smell like a citrus grove. The air
conditioner blows cool air on my exposed arms, and while I am not
eager to try to persuade Carl
s sister to leave her husband, it is relaxing to be alone in my car, humming.
Just to be out of the office, away from Ben, is enough. We have
been preparing for the grand jury hearing, and during these past
days the scent of Ben
s office, of leather and dust, has become too
familiar. I have learned the names of the dead fish that hang on his
walls and I am able to predict what he will eat for lunch. I have begun eating things I know will appall him for the pleasure of watching him grimace.
s diet could use an overhaul. His prominent paunch, product
of a meat-heavy, gravy-topped diet, makes me wonder if he knows
what cholesterol is and how it works. Then again, most lawyers I
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
know are crap eaters. They eat food that fits in their hand, on the
go. Stuffing sandwiches and snack cakes into themselves with all the
ceremony of a person stuffing quarters into a Laundromat washing
machine.
The bright green exit sign for 167B is ahead. I recall my conversation with Deidre Kendall, of the statistics she gave me on
domestic abuse and the common reactions to anticipate. Deidre
was patient and kind, but realistic. She cautioned me that my intervention might gain me nothing but hostility. 
That
s okay,
had told her. 
m a public prosecutor. Hostility comes with the
territory.
I heard rumors you had moved South to do public law. That
great.
 Her sincerity made me cringe. I thanked her for her help and
wished her luck in her own work.
Savannah is beautiful. The downtown is divided into grids
punctuated by small gardens and squares, the epitome of good city
planning. However, many of these streets are marked one way, making the grid into a maze. I have to make a third right before I reach
the street that will take me to East Broad, where Sarah lives, on the
fringe of the fashionable historic district. I slow and begin reading
the numbers on the houses. Sixty-four, sixty-six. I am close. My
stomach stirs and I realize I forgot to pack antacids. Eighty-four. I
park in the adjoining driveway behind a brown minivan.
The house is postcard pretty: white wood with ivy-green shuttered windows and a brick walkway that intersects grass so lush it
looks fake. The doorbell ding-dongs, causing a dog inside to bark,
fast and angry. I almost slip off the low cement stair in my hurry to
step backward. Carl didn
t warn me about a dog.
When the door opens it reveals a younger, female Carl and a
petite terrier. My embarrassment renders me speechless, allowing
Sarah to ask, 
Can I help you?
 Her tone implies that she would
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
prefer I say no and leave. This, plus the fading bruise on her cheekbone, assures me that I have found the right woman and the right
house.
Sarah Henning? My name is Natalie Goldberg. I work with
your brother Carl.
Carl?
 Her voice, anxious, sounds like Carl
s, only a little higher
and softer. 
Is he okay?
s fine. That
s not why I
m here. May I come in?
 So what if
I sound like a pushy Northerner? I am one.
Her face wrinkles with worry, revealing a crease mark in her
makeup. Through it I see the faded outline of another bruise on
her temple. I suspect that without cosmetics she might resemble
an Impressionist painting, all swirls of color, applied with fists, not
brushes.
Sarah steps backward. I accept her silent invitation before she
can reconsider. She walks past a pristine foyer that smells of wood
polish into a sitting room filled with antique furniture, including a
cabinet of violet-patterned china plates and teacups. This furniture
would pass a white-glove test. The children must be barred from
this room. Where were they? The house was silent, no pitter patter
of little feet audible.
You said Carl is okay?
 Her determination to make sure reminds me of Carl and makes me smile. Her eyes are brown, not
blue, but her teeth are just as white-picket perfect.
Yes, he is well. I came because he mentioned that you
re in need
of help.
 A progression of emotions alters her face: confusion, anger,
embarrassment, then fear, and finally the tight mask she should have
worn if she wanted to fool me. Not that she could. The makeup,
the bruises, and the too tidy home: it all speaks of abuse, as did her
silence. Silence is the native language of abuse.
Carl is mistaken.
 She clears her throat. 
I do not require as81
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
sistance. I am sorry you took time out of your schedule to come by
on an unnecessary errand.
 Her brown eyes meet mine.
My fists clench. Errand? Errand? She describes my three-hour
drive to her house to rescue her and her children as an errand? As if
it were no more than emptying the trash or cleaning the tub?
Whether you believe it or not, you need help. Those fading
black and blue marks will be replaced by fresh marks or broken
bones.
 She touches her cheek. 
Your children may very well be visiting the same emergency rooms you frequent unless your husband
is clever enough to rotate visits to different hospitals.
 I tilt my head
to the side, and she flinches at this prediction.
Billy and Lily are at an exceptionally high risk. In homes where
partner abuse occurs, children are fifteen hundred times more
likely to be abused.
 Her shoulders hunch. 
Plus they are learning
behavior that could influence them. According to the American
Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Violence and
the Family, a child
s exposure to the father abusing the mother is
the strongest risk factor for transmitting violent behavior from
one generation to the next. Billy might hit his own girlfriend or
wife. He
ll think it
s normal, that daddies hit mommies, that men
beat women.
She sniffles and shakes her head, but I don
t stop. 
Fifty percent
of all women murdered are killed by their spouses or an acquaintance.
 I throw facts and statistics at her until her tight face crumples in on itself. Then I lean forward and hand her a portable packet
of Kleenex and feel like an absolute monster.
No kindness or empathy. No. I went straight into my bad-cop
routine. And all because she demeaned my act of compassion by
calling it an errand. Deidre warned me she might be hostile but did
I pay attention? Guilt makes me feel five hundred pounds heavier.
I listen to the grandfather clock tick until she stops crying. Then I
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
tell her what she should do next: leave with the children, go to the
police station and file charges, get a restraining order. Drive to the
nearest shelter and stay there until we can begin legal proceedings.
ll divorce him,
 I say, 
and you
ll be safe. We
ll keep you
and Billy and Lily safe.
 I don
t mention the other statistic about
battered women: that they are more likely to be killed when leaving
their abuser.
I fold clothes for Sarah and she settles them into suitcases. 
used to be sweet,
 she tells me. I recognize the instinct to defend
s worst choices.
m sure he was,
 I say. Sarah hands me clothing, a bag of toiletries, and, at my suggestion, some bedding.
Shelters are often overcrowded,
 I say. She nods but I see the
fog of doubt cloud her eyes. She is wondering what she has consented to, what this shelter will be like.
We collect the children from the house next door. Sarah introduces me to her neighbor as Jessica, an old high school friend. We
t want to leave an easy trail for William. The woman rests a
hand on Sarah
s arm and asks if she knows what she is doing. I place
my hand on Sarah
s shoulder. 
She does now,
 I tell the woman, daring her to defy me. I would like her to, so that I could argue with
her, ask why the hell she let her friend and neighbor get hit night after night. She must see the anger in my eyes, for she says nothing.
Billy has a snub nose I assume comes from William. Lily has
Sarah
s flaxen hair. They bounce about, high on lemonade and
summertime fun. We interrupted their water balloon fight. They
need dry clothes before setting out on their trip, which they want
to know all about. Where are we going? Why? When will we be
back? Could they give Captain a dog treat before they leave? Sarah
eyes grow damp, but I shake my head no. Shelters don
t allow pets.
I don
t envy the dog, alone in a house with an abandoned, enraged
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
William, but there is no time to plan around him. William is due
home in five hours and so much remains to be done.
Sarah, I need you to do one last thing.
 She is holding Lily
favorite bear, Mr. Cuddles.
What?
 She sounds doubtful. I cannot blame her.
Wash your face.
What?
I imagine she hasn
t left the house without cosmetics in years,
but it will make our entry into the police station easier by clearing
any doubt from skeptical cops
 minds about what is happening at
84 East Broad Street.
I carry the last suitcase downstairs and pack it into the rear of the
minivan. Sarah emerges a few moments later. Her face is wet and
red, as if she scrubbed hard and fast with a washcloth. The right side
is a palette of bleeding colors, blues into purples into lime greens.
The left side is unmarred except for a small scar by her eye. Holding the teddy bear heightens the impression of a funhouse mirror:
distorted and frightening.
Lily looks at her mother and says, 
Why are you practicing for
Halloween?
Billy says nothing; he knows his mother isn
t playing a game.
The policemen at the station are kind. They distract the kids with
coloring books and an abbreviated tour of the station (no occupied
jail cells or weapons closets inspections). It charms and dismays me;
how comfortable they are with the children, an ease won from too
many similar visits. I sit beside Sarah, interjecting legal advice when
needed, which isn
t often. The legal battles will follow.
On our way out of the station a cop taps his dark hand against
my shoulder. 
Hey, aren
t you the daughter of the guy who represented Clinton Fellows?
 Clinton was famous in Georgia for protesting unequal real estate pricing for blacks during the 1980s. I
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
remembered him as a soft-spoken man who always carried hard
candies in his pockets.
I tell the policeman that Aaron Goldberg is my father.
Following in your old man
s footsteps, huh? That
s great.
Not exactly. I
m a public prosecutor.
The cop, who could not have been more than fifteen when Clinton was on trial, ignores my heavy voice. 
But you
re helping people,
right? You
re helping this lady and her kids.
 He nods toward Sarah
and her wide-eyed children.
Sure,
 I say.
When I was five years old I wanted to be Wonder Woman. I had
the Underoos and a long loop of rope and a pair of tall boots borrowed from my mother
s closet. I dashed through the house, clad in
star-spangled splendor, ready to right wrongs. While I usher Sarah
and the kids outside I find myself wishing I still had those Underoos. Not that they would fit, but I crave the feeling of invincibility
and magic they provided. When I wore them I was better than my
everyday self.
On the highway, I watch the rearview mirror to check that Sarah
is still following me. She could skip. Nothing is preventing her from
turning off at the next exit, returning to her life. No matter how
awful, it is familiar.
When I outgrew my Underoos I wore a costume shop set of fake
glasses/nose and carried a briefcase, sporting a pilfered suit jacket
that hung below my knees. My second hero? My father. When did
I outgrow that costume?
After twenty-six miles of buzzing highway it is time to turn off
and head to the shelter. My directional click-clacks. In the mirror
I see Sarah has hers on, as well. She will follow me this far at least.
Thank God for that.
Chapter Thirteen
July 29, 2000
This is just what the doctor ordered. Actually, it is just what Lala
ordered. She told me I should visit the State Botanical Garden in
Athens, and then she wrote out directions in a swirly, frail script. I
invited her to come along, but she declined. It is a two-hour trip to
Athens, and Lala tries to limit her travel radius to fifteen minutes
from her white clapboard home. I wonder if she began this policy
after her husband
s driving-related death. It may be that she doesn
like long car trips.
The sloping walkways of the shade garden twist and turn around
sections named in honor of the seven districts of the garden clubs of
Georgia. Here the trees block the merciless sun
s rays. The last thermometer I passed registered 87 degrees, but I am certain it broke,
unable to cope with another hot and humid day. I look into the
pool at the Mathis Plaza, at the reflected trees, and recall Lala in
her straw hat and pink and green plaid Bermuda shorts, waving me
Godspeed on my journey to Athens. I should have told her not to
worry. If the past week hadn
t killed me, nothing could.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Contrary to my expectations, the grand jury hearing went well.
Ben did all the talking. I sat in the air-conditioned room during the
two-day proceedings, taking notes and watching the faces assembled
in the conference room. Georgia law requires that the grand jury be
balanced in terms of race and sex with respect to the county
s population as determined by the last census and the number of persons
in each jury pool. Of the twenty-one jurors assembled, twelve were
female, ten male. Twelve were black, nine white. None of them prevaricated before returning a true bill indicting Calvin Washington
for murder, felonious murder, and aggravated assault. We didn
t get
the simple majority required of an indictment. We got each and
every juror.
Each grand juror in Georgia is sworn thus: You shall present no
one from envy, hatred, or malice, nor shall you leave anyone unpresented from fear, favor, affection, reward, or the hope thereof, but you
shall present all things truly and as they come to your knowledge. So help
you God. For 
present
 read 
indict
 or 
convict.
 I admire this oath
because it recognizes human frailty and the temptations of power
that must be avoided in exercising justice. The seventeen people assembled around the large oval table watched Ben. They listened to
his statements and asked careful questions. They knew what returning an indictment meant. I could only hope we would acquire an
equally thoughtful jury for the criminal trial.
My garden map is wrinkled and damp. The public grounds
comprise a tiny portion of the 313-acre preserve the state botanical garden includes, and I would hate to lose my way. I turn away
from the shaded paths, determined to brave the cruel sun for a stroll
through the International Garden. The map illustration promises
geometric-patterned gardens. It sounds like my kind of space.
Sweaty half-moons are forming beneath my armpits. My face
crackles with heat, and I know that despite a liberal dose of sun88
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
screen and my Boston Red Sox baseball cap, I am going to have a
dotting of freckles on and around my nose by day
s end. I imagine
them sprouting to the surface like eager seedlings. Freckles make
me look younger, contradicting my work attire of ironed garments,
coordinated jewelry, and deep red lipstick. I rub my nose as if I can
somehow stop the forming freckles.
The shade garden gives way to an open path spotted with kneehigh plaques that give the flowers
 Latin names, growing season,
and interesting facts. I learn that Sedum spectabile 
Herbstfreude,
known as 
Autumn Joy,
 attracts honeybees and butterflies with its
clusters of red-pink flowers. My focus is diluted by droplets of sweat
that threaten to run into my eyes and the image of Sarah, who has
been playing hide-and-seek in my mind since I saw her nine days
ago. She appears at unexpected moments, much like her brother
Carl. He tells me she and the kids are still at the shelter, still safe.
He does not tell me that they are frightened or confused, but I can
imagine.
The International Garden exceeds my hopes. Among the designed flower plots is a garden with herbs used in the Middle Ages
for dyes, cooking, and medicines. The air smells cooler and tangier
here. I bend down and breathe deeply, the fragrances filling my sinuses, blocking the smell of sunscreen and sweat. I distinguish lavender, which is supposed to promote relaxation. I could use some.
The curved benches beside the herbs are just what my tired legs
need. I lean back against the wood, exhale, and close my eyes. If I
breathe hard enough perhaps I can distinguish the scent of photosynthesis. I smile and open my eyes. A dark blur in front of me
resolves itself into the shape of a woman. She wears the tan shorts
and button-down shirt of a garden employee. She smiles at me, the
rest of her features hazy with sun. 
Looks like you
re enjoying the
garden,
 she says.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
s wonderful.
She looks about her, at the boxed growths of grouped plants and
flowers. 
It sure is. You have a nice day.
 She walks toward the visitors
 center, her steps light and brisk despite the heat.
I have grown more accustomed to people talking to me unprompted, a culture shock after New York, where strangers don
speak to you unless it
s to share advice like 
get the fuck out of the
way.
 The unexpected kind comment, the sincere wish for another
happiness, still catches me off guard. At least it
s a happy surprise, a
nice moment, unlike yesterday
s bombshell from Ben.
We sorted the physical evidence, reviewing what Wilkins and
Cox had told us, when Ben said he needed to leave early that evening. Surprised that he would bother to tell me, I shrugged. 
old friend is in town.
 Alarm bells should have rung in my skull,
for Ben didn
t share personal details of his life any more than I did.
Walter Owens. We went to school together. He is a judge.
That
s when the fire alarm inside my head shrieked, too late.
You know Judge Owens, don
t you?
 His eyes lasered me, his hands
resting on his paunch. 
He recommended you for this job.
Yes, at my behest, Judge Owens recommended me for this job.
My chest felt as if a boa constrictor were hugging me. How much
did Ben know?
I will be sure to tell him how you are doing,
 he promised, tilting back farther in his chair. If he wasn
t careful, he would tip too
far and fall to the floor. If I were lucky his skull would split like a
cantaloupe.
And how would that be?
 My voice, flat and cool, cost me some
effort.
A light flared within Ben
s eyes. Anger? Admiration? Surprise?
re learning,
 he said. 
re getting a lot of court exposure.
Such high praise, I almost said, but didn
t. I was afraid to an90
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
noy him. He knew something about me, or did he? Judge Owens
connection to my hiring wasn
t a secret but the link between that
and my leaving New York was, or so I had believed. Did Ben know
something about the circumstances under which I had left Walters, MacLittle, and Tate or was he irked that I had been hired, in
part, because of friendly influence? He has never made bones about
his feelings that my gender, privilege, and education annoy him.
Perhaps Judge Owens
a alliance also needles him and that is all he
meant. I don
t know, and it
s still driving me mad, four days later.
I shake my head to clear it of the questions I cannot answer and
look about me. Few people walk among the fragrant paths. They
probably decided that a late July afternoon might not be the best
time to be out-of-doors. They may be cooler but they
re missing
the buzz of honeybees swarming about bright blossoms. Their fat
black and yellow bodies fly in inebriated patterns, affected by the
heat, or maybe the environment. So many flowers in one place. It
is honeybee paradise.
I rise from my seat and wander anew. I stop reading the plaques.
The visual input is enough. If only I could keep the other thoughts
at bay, the worries, the pain. It is both worse and better than when
I first arrived, numb with grief. In those first months I did nothing but unpack, study, assist on cases, study and then study some
more. With the bar exam over I worked more than necessary and
decorated my new rental and kept everyone at arm
s length. Now it
getting complicated with the casework and the death penalty and
s veiled hints and Carl
s abused sister and missing things like
Lacey and the easy relationship I once had with my parents.
Although I haven
t visited the dahlia garden yet, I decide it is
time to leave. The distraction of the gardens has passed. As I cross
the parking lot I wonder if perhaps I should go into therapy, and
then I snort a half-laugh because the craziest people I know are the
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
ones who became therapists. Lacey says psychiatrists take comfort
in their work because it validates their own insanity.
In my rearview mirror I can see the high gates surrounding the
state garden. An enormous painted wooden flower summons nature
lovers. The fake blossom is bright yellow and orange and so big that
I am a half-mile away before it fades from sight, its cheerful petals
disappearing behind a slow-grade hill.
Good-bye, gardens,
 I say, and then I turn the radio on and
search for something to sing along to, something bright and silly to
match the freckles radiating from my nose out to my cheeks like a
pioneer girl doll
Chapter Fourteen
August 9, 2000
Ben is hiding something. He has been out of the office several times.
I know he has not been tied up in court. I would know if he had
other hearings scheduled. More unsettling is his apologetic tone
when he says, 
ll be out tomorrow.
 He seems almost guilty, certainly furtive. Could he be having an affair? Is this why his wife
stopped by his office? To make sure he was at work?
He is out today, again, and I should be celebrating. I can concentrate on my cases without worry of interruption, of impromptu
quizzes on everything from police procedure to appeals, of needless
comments on my organization system. Ben is a piler. He has stacks
of paper in his office, on his desk, his floor, and his chairs. He can
locate the items he needs, though I have no idea how he does it. His
office looks like a life-sized game of Legal Jenga. One false move and
the entire system could topple.
Once, when I reached into my birthday tickler file to extract a
thank-you card, Ben coughed several times before managing to ask,
You have a greeting card organizer?
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Sure.
 I opened the plastic folder
s expanding mouth so that
he could see each slot marked by month. 
I buy birthday cards in
advance and file them by month. I have extras for things like 
well
 and 
thank you
 cards. It
s great. I never run to the drugstore
and panic because I can
t find an appropriate card, and I
m never
late mailing them.
He laughed and choked at the same time. When he recovered he
told me, 
re a little scary.
Just a little?
 I asked.
Ben walked away, muttering 
anal retentive
 under his breath. I
smiled before licking the thank-you card
s matching lilac envelope.
It didn
t look as though Ben was going to adopt my filing system
anytime soon.
To my surprise he asked me about it a few days later. 
What do
you call it?
The birthday tickler file.
Why tickler?
 His morbid fascination needed appeasing.
Because it tickles your memory.
 Unable to resist, I added, 
your fancy. You want to go card-shopping during lunch?
 His wideeyed horror was all the reward I sought. 
Let me know if you change
your mind.
Okay, so we
re not a super duo, but we were making progress in
communicating. Only now he is gone, again, and I don
t know why.
I try to push the matter aside with a mental bulldozer. I stare at the
sheaf of papers comprising my latest assignment: an arson case involving no corpses and no injuries, just a razed building insured for
four hundred thousand dollars. I should be delighted. The outraged
parties are: the insurers, who don
t want to cut a check for a building
they suspect was torched by the owner
s nephew, and the firefighters who claim that the fire could have consumed nearby residential
buildings. I find this hard to care about. It doesn
t compel me. It
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
too much like the faceless paper-pushing work I did in New York
where the only things at stake were varying amounts of money and
sometimes a multibillion-dollar company
s reputation. I need something more. Good God, I sound like a pain junkie. I run a hand
through my hair, catching my fingers in a cluster of curls.
Carl walks in as I am attempting to remove my hand from my
hair. 
Hi, Nat,
 he says. 
May I talk to you?
Sure.
 I pull my fingers free, ripping some hairs from my scalp.
I swallow a scream and brush the hairs into my wastebasket. My
father
s hair is a genetic curse.
I just wanted to update you on Sarah and the kids.
 He rubs his
large hands up and down the tops of his legs, from his thighs to his
kneecaps. 
They
ve moved out of the shelter and are staying with
our mom
s sister, Aunt Jemima.
You have an Aunt Jemima?
 I envision a black woman wearing
a spotted kerchief atop her head, smiling down from a bottle of
maple syrup.
Yeah. I know. The name. We call her Jemmy. Everyone does.
Anyway, they
re with her in Vidalia. William tried to file some custody papers, claiming that Sarah is mentally unstable and unfit to
parent.
 He chafes his legs harder.
I assume his petition was denied?
Yes. So far his attempts to get the kids back have failed. The
police in Savannah were impressed by your visit. Their report made
clear to the judge that William shouldn
t get near her or the kids
for now.
Good.
 I remember leaving Sarah at the shelter. She tried to hide
the tremor in her hands from Billy and Lily, who wanted to know why
the house was set so far into the woods. The better to hide you from
your father, I thought, but did not say. I left it to Sarah to explain.
I can
t thank you enough for your help.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Oh, but he could, and he had. I had heard nothing but 
thank
 from Carl since I returned that day, wanting to bury myself
under my sheets and sleep the rest of the week.
Really, Carl, like I said, she was ready to go. I just nudged her.
Pushed her
 is more accurate; pushed her like a mother bird pushes
its baby out of the nest. Fly or die.
She left because of you. I know it.
 He reaches into his interior
jacket pocket and withdraws a long flat box of gray velvet, a jeweler
box. He sets it onto the desk and pushes it toward me. 
This is
a thank-you gift. My mother helped pick it out.
 There is only a
mother. Carl
s father died years ago of a heart attack.
I reach forward, hesitant. The box lid lifts with a small snap. Inside, a bright coil of silver is laid out and in its midst lies a tiny chai,
the Jewish symbol for life. 
s beautiful,
 I murmur. Wherever did
he find this?
Do you like it?
 He looks from the necklace to me and then
back to the necklace.
I touch the small silver symbol, the Hebrew letters Chet and Yod
attached. Is it me or does it feel warm? 
Yes. Thank you. You know,
you didn
t have to get me anything.
I wanted to and my mother wanted to, as well. Sarah and Billy
and Lily mean so much to us.
I finger the slender thread of silver. Carl rises and asks, 
Do you
need help putting it on?
 I say. 
No, that
s okay. I can do it myself.
 My office door
is open. What if someone walked by and saw Carl fastening a necklace about my neck? They would not understand. I fasten the clasp
and smooth the chain, trying to soothe myself.
Looks pretty.
 He displays his perfect teeth for me in a wide
smile.
Yes, it does.
 The chai rests above the cleft of my breasts.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I ask him how his caseload is and he says everything is fine, and
his packing is almost done. Of course, he is uncertain he should go
on vacation with Sarah
s situation unresolved. I tell him the situation won
t be resolved for some time and that he deserves the trip to
Bermuda. He leaves after thanking me twice more.
I do not tell him I could use a vacation from his well-meaning
inquiries, from his gratitude and his gift.
Henry gave me a ruby ring surrounded by delicate gold filigree.
It overwhelmed the fourth finger of my right hand. Of course, it
could not be made to fit my left ring finger. That would have raised
questions at the office. When I left New York, I took the ring with
me. It sits in a box tucked amid lacy underthings I wear when I have
run through my clean cotton panties and do not have the time or
the inclination to do laundry.
Now there is Carl
s necklace. Some women would give their eyeteeth to have handsome men offer them jewelry. Not me. I just
want an untarnished professional reputation. I should have considered that before I followed Henry into that hotel room. But I could
not see beyond the moment, beyond the tread of his leather shoes
on that thick carpet, leading me forward to something new.
I run the charm from side to side on the slender silver chain,
back and forth, back and forth. The chai makes a small humming
noise as it slides against the chain. Carl
s gift came with a physical
tic; how appropriate. I still my hand and look toward my chirping
computer. It reminds me I have a plea-bargain discussion in an hour
with Helen Leland. Her client shot up a convenience store during
a robbery, but the only thing he hit was a freezer full of ice cream.
The cops reached him before he could get anything into his pockets
other than a package of licorice. Sadly, ineptitude is not a mitigating
circumstance, not in my book.
I am contemplating how best to needle Helen about the candy
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
thief. Something like, 
Maybe your client should have practiced
stealing from babies. I hear it
s pretty easy.
Will interrupts, popping his head in and rapping his knuckles
on the frame, rather than the door.
Hi, Will.
Have you got a minute?
Sure. I
m just preparing to tell Helen Leland that her client
idiocy doesn
t qualify as a mental defect.
His weary face reshapes itself as he smiles. The pockets of sleeplessness beneath his hazel eyes disappear and his ears lift like those
of a happy puppy. 
The licorice thief?
 I nod. He knows. Of course
he does. Will tries to keep abreast of everything. Hence the eye
pouches.
What can I do for you?
 I ask.
Nothing. At least nothing you
re not already doing.
 His tone
implies that he recognizes that I
m overworked and underpaid, but
that we
re all in this boat together. 
I actually wanted to talk about
the Washington case.
Will closes the door behind him before taking a seat opposite
me. Uh-oh.
How are things going?
 Will steeples his fingers together. It
s his
office chief pose. It does not augur glad tidings.
Fine. Good. We have a lot of physical evidence and plenty of
witnesses to testify to the fight between Calvin and Marcus. It
solid case.
Solid
 is one step below 
a lock
 but I won
t use that
term about this case. I almost never use it. 
A lock
 implies there is
no way you can lose, and as any trial lawyer will tell you, there are
more ways to lose a case than you thought possible.
m glad to hear it. And you? How are you holding up?
You mean how do I feel about assisting a prosecution that might
result in a man
s death?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Will raises his pointed index fingers to his lips and nods.
I should buy stock in Maalox, given the amount I
ve consumed
the past few weeks.
 Will says nothing. 
You know I oppose the
death penalty, but this is my job, and I believe in justice. It
s up to
the jurors ultimately.
re right. It is up to the jurors. It
s a tremendous responsibility. The administration of criminal justice. Alexander Hamilton
called it 
the great cement of society.
He also wrote that the states
 power to administer criminal and
civil justice independent of other influences could so wholly wield
power over their citizens as to prove a threat to the power of the
Union.
Will
s lips curl upward. Silent praise. 
You like The Federalist
Papers?
Quite a lot. I wrote a paper in law school citing Number 17. A
paper on the death penalty and the states
 abuse of power in using
it, but somehow, I think you already know that.
Will nods. 
Good paper. A little heavy on philosophy citations,
but good.
m glad you enjoyed it.
 I had not suspected Will read anything I wrote in law school, but I maintain a veneer of calm. I resist
the urge to tap my feet, to betray my nervousness.
re a bright girl, Natalie, and I
m glad we got you.
 He makes
me sound as if I was the number one draft pick for a sports team.
You passed your multistate bar exam with how many months to
prepare?
Three.
 But it was all I did. Burning the letters of the law into
my brain helped keep me from picking up the phone and screaming at Henry or filing a civil suit against Walters and MacLittle. Not
that I would have won. It was their word against mine.
Three months. Wow. I
m glad we were able to get your fit99
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
ness paperwork processed in time. I would have hated to make you
wait until the February exam, although at first I thought you would
have done well to wait.
 Will had tried to convince me to postpone
taking the bar exam. He said I could assist for a few more months
before taking it. He was a little afraid I would fail. Not as afraid as
I was.
My fitness certificate?
 As I recalled, that had been done within
weeks.
Yes. Normally you have to submit the fitness certificate and
have it approved seven months before you can apply to the bar.
I hear a low buzz, as if a mosquito is whining by my ear. I look
to my shoulder but there are no insects nearby.
Seven months?
 I repeat, sure I must have misheard.
Well, that
s the usual. Four months for those who wait until
the last moment.
 He smiles as if we share a common tendency to
postpone things. 
Good thing you knew you wanted to come here,
and Judge Owens was able to help out.
 My smile is weak.
s a good man, despite his shoes.
 Will invites me to laugh
with him, to mock Judge Owens
s footwear. He does not realize
that I cannot recall what Judge Owens wears on his feet. Sandals?
Cowboy boots? 
He was able to push it through the Bar Admissions
Committee, since he serves on it.
The fitness certificate is required of all lawyers who wish to practice in Georgia. You must submit it before taking the bar. But by
seven months! I had no idea, though Judge Owens did, thank God.
Everyone in Georgia must know, including Ben. Shit. Will
s voice
is tinny and distant and I realize I have missed the first part of his
sentence when he says, 
Ben tell you?
I shake my head to clear the buzzing and the dark suspicions that
have begun to sprout within my mind, poisonous seeds. 
Pardon?
I say.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
He didn
t, did he?
 He sighs, an atypical vocalization of displeasure. 
Ben has prostate cancer.
What?
 I don
t mean to yell, but the syllable explodes from my
mouth.
He was diagnosed two months ago. He went for a routine physical and the doctor noticed something wrong.
I am trying to wrap my head around what he is telling me while
attempting to banish the image of Ben in a hospital gown being
examined from behind.
He has stage two cancer. He is scheduled to go in for radiation
treatment. It
s a simple operation.
 Will is staring at the law books
behind me with singular focus. 
He goes next week. He should be
out of the hospital in a day, but I have ordered him out of the office
for a week. I think he should rest, and make sure he is fit to return
to work.
 He directs his eyes my way, able to look at me now that
he has finished discussing Ben
s prostate. 
I had hoped he would
mention it to you.
My God. Cancer. That was why his wife looked so concerned in
his office that day. He wasn
t having an affair.
I know he and you don
t see eye to eye on everything.
A sandpaper scrap of laughter escapes. 
You could say that,
say. 
But we
ve made some progress . . . or I thought we had . . . the
case preparations are going well,
 I conclude, aware of how lame my
words sound. How well could we be communicating if Ben hasn
told me about his illness?
I suspected Ben hadn
t told you, though I urged him to. I realize
s a private matter, but you are teamed on this case, and I don
t have
to remind you of its importance. I thought you should know.
Sure.
 What is there to say? I rest my elbows on the reliable
weight of Guvnor
s solid wood desk.
Ben is a good lawyer. Old-fashioned and a bit opinionated, but
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
solid. We
re lucky to have him. I think he can teach you quite a
bit.
 Will smiles to make this more palatable. 
And I
m sure you can
impart an idea or two into his mind.
Easier said than done.
Who was it that said anything easy isn
t worth having?
Someone spoiled since birth?
 I would give my right eye for
things easily achievable at this moment.
He rises from the chair with a wince, as if sitting so long has
done him injury. 
I hope you
ll forgive me for bringing you bad
news, but I did think you ought to know about Ben.
Thanks for telling me.
s not a bad guy.
Bad guy
 wasn
t the term I was looking
to apply.
You know Jeff 
s leaving had nothing to do with him, right?
blink hard, appalled that Will intuited my darkest thoughts about
Ben. At my most frustrated I have wondered if he was responsible
for Jeffrey
s departure from our offices. I nod acknowledgment.
Is it okay to tell him I know?
 I ask, although I have no idea
how I will.
Yes. I think it would be best.
I think it would be best for Will to leave now, before he can impart any more awful news. He does, with a somber 
m sorry
 and
a more cheerful 
Have fun with the candy thief.
I rest my face in the cradle of my palms, aware that I have to
meet Helen in less than half an hour. I cannot seem to move, buried
under a tide of unexpected news. My torso shakes, as if cold. I lift
my face to stare across the room at my suit jacket, hanging upon
its hook. The deep blue of the fabric looks almost like a cutout in
the door
s shiny wood, as though someone had sawed a hole in the
shape of a hanging jacket in the door. I could put my hand through
it and feel . . . what? I do not know, but whatever lies behind seems
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
preferable to what lies on this side of the door. There is no escape
on this side, only more secrets. I can delay pondering them, though,
and I must if I am going to meet Helen in twenty minutes. The
candy thief jokes I had prepared seem stale now, soured by the dark
emotions Will deposited in my office.
Chapter Fifteen
Someone from the Spring Street frame shop left me a message that
my pictures are ready. I had planned to wait until tomorrow to pick
them up, but while driving home I change my mind. This displeases
the driver behind me who yells, 
Learn how to drive!
 in reaction
to my abrupt left turn. In Georgia, drivers yell at you. They don
lean on their horns as New Yorkers do or flip you the finger as Bostonians do or shoot you with their handguns as Los Angelenos do.
They shout out their window. I think it
s a more personal expression
of road rage.
A bald-headed man inside the shop is turning the open sign to
closed as I reach the door. He grins and turns it over again, ushering me inside with a 
You picking something up?
 I give him my
name and he disappears into the back room I imagine stocked high
with paintings and posters and photographs.
I study matting materials and rulers and cutting instruments until the man reappears, his arms stretched wide around a bulky package of brown paper tied with twine, the pale, wiry sort capable of
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
cutting you. I imagine getting home and untying the string to find
velvet Elvis paintings or Dogs Playing Poker inside.
They
re lovely works,
 he says, tapping the paper with a forefinger stained blue. He hesitates before asking, 
Is the girl in the
drawing . . . is that you?
How to answer this? 
My sister,
 I say. I have found the phantom sibling I always wanted.
That explains the resemblance.
The package is heavy. I carry it with extended arms, trying my
best not to knock it against doorways, tables, or chairs. Huffing and
puffing, I resolve to join a gym, any gym, someday soon. I set it on
the kitchen table and fetch a steak knife. My purse swings back and
forth, a leather pendulum below my arm, as I saw at the package
string. It snaps with a soft pop. I fold back the crisp brown paper,
and there she is, my sister of the laughing eyes and dimpled cheek,
framed in gilt scalloped wood. The painting looks almost alive. I
half expect her to speak to me, but she remains silent and I transfer
her to a chair so that I may look at the second picture.
It is a small oil painting bought late last summer during a street
fair. I kept passing back and forth before an artist
s stand until he
asked, 
See anything you like?
 I did. A picture of blue hydrangeas
painted on Masonite. He wanted less than I would have paid, so
little I thought I misheard him. I told Lacey about my purchase and
predicted that if she ever left New York she would be confronted by
reverse sticker shock.
s bad enough you moved away. Now you have to tell me how
cheap things are elsewhere? Gee, thanks,
 she said. I made sure
never to disclose how little I pay in rent for my house after that
conversation.
I pause before lifting the second picture to reveal the third item,
the one I hesitated over before adding it to the 
to be framed
 pile.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
It is a diptych. In the left photograph I stand, hip high to my father,
before the wrought iron of Johnston Gate at Harvard. My mother
took this picture one July day when we walked about the square. I
rode atop my father
s shoulders; my pigtails bounced as he walked.
We stopped and my mother pointed through the bars of the tall
black gate that looked as if it belonged in the pages of my fairy-tale
book. Beyond the gate were green lawns and curvy footpaths and
dark redbrick buildings.
That
s where your dad went to school.
 Even before she said it,
I longed to go inside, to chase the squirrels and to pretend to read
like the man sitting on the steps of the building across from us.
m going to go to school here, too,
 I said, bending forward so
that my father could see my face. He groaned and swung me over
and down, into his arms. He squeezed me, so tight I thought my
chest would burst like a balloon.
Of course you will,
 he said.
The photograph on the right shows me shoulder high to my
father, gowned and capped in black, my diploma gripped in my left
hand. We stand before the same gate. Captured again are the broad
smiles and the sun-inspired squints. We are happy. I rub my eyes,
refusing to be sidetracked by regret. I rewrap the paper around the
pictures and move the stack to the counter. Out of sight . . . well,
out of sight. Inside the refrigerator I search for comfort. I find leftover barbecue. It will do.
The tang of the barbecue sauce comes as a pleasant departure
from my menu of frozen dinners. I offer a silent thank-you to Lala,
who pressed the remains of her church
s barbecue feast on me. Lala
says it is a pity I keep such long hours, and never have time to cook.
Yes, I tell her, I could really use a wife: someone to cook and clean
for me so when I get home supper is on the table, someone like my
mother. Though cooking was never her strength.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I munch on a salted corncob. Back in the area of my brain where
memories collect cobwebs, I see my grandpapa rubbing his corncob
into a stick of butter, transforming its solid surface into a molten
crater pocked with kernels. Did his wife scold him, or was she gone
by then? I try to remember, staring at the rippled surface of the butter stick before me in which one kernel stands, legacy of my grandpapa. He died when I was eight. By age ten, all my grandparents
had passed away, leaving little but furniture and photographs and
memories I must turn over and examine, checking for authenticity.
I could call my parents and ask, 
Did Grandpapa always roll his
corn in the butter or did he do it to amuse me?
 They too might not
remember. Long ago our family circle constricted to include only
we three. I wipe a smear of barbecue sauce from the rim of my plate
and suck the sauce from my finger. Two and one, I think, not three.
I am outside that circle now.
t play with your food, Natalie,
 I can hear my father
s deep
voice intone as I make a face with corn kernel eyes, macaroni ears
and nose, and a half-biscuit mouth. He would scold me when he was
tired or upset and noticed me arranging my food into pictures or rainbow spectrums. If his cases were going well, if he was distracted with
thoughts of writing a speech for the New England Chapter of the
American Civil Liberties Union, he would not scold me. He would
not notice, or, if he did, he would give me a quick grin that told me he
too thought tonight
s meal was better to play with than to eat.
I scrape my food face into the trash and wash my plate, fork, and
knife in soapy water so hot my hands hurt. The pain is welcome,
distracting me from the thoughts that flit behind my eyes like bats.
Things I would rather not examine.
Damn Will.
 Even as I say it, I know it is not his fault. He
thought it was the news of Ben
s cancer that subdued me. How ironic
that it was his words of praise, his remark about processing my
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
law forms. I assumed I had made the fitness certification submission deadline and had focused my worry on the exam. In Georgia,
to be certified to practice law is a two-step process. You must complete a fitness certification form avowing that you are an upstanding
person who pays her bills on time, has not been convicted of any
felonies, and is not crazy. No, really. They ask about your mental
health. I had a good chuckle about that series of questions as I filled
out the form on the floor of my Manhattan apartment, surrounded
by moving boxes, my life wrapped in newspaper and bubble packaging. Depressed? Unstable? Manic? Me? Of course not.
I forwarded the form to Judge Owens
s address. He never told
me I was months behind. Once he ascertained that I was intent on
obtaining this job and that I would not be deterred by talk of long
hours, low pay, relocation, and a wholly new environment, he said
he would see what he could do. He did plenty, more than I knew. It
seems I should have sent him a case of fine Scotch, not just a bottle.
Above the kitchen sink, the window shows my reflected outline.
I look like an amorphous lump, a heavy shadow. I turn away and
head for my bedroom.
When I tug the knob on my bedside table, it slides forward so
fast that the drawer flies free of its grooves and lands on the floor
and my feet. 
Fuck!
 My feet sting. I kneel on the braided rug beside my bed and look through the contents of the drawer, half of
them tumbled to the rug. There it is, the picture. Me and Henry at
that inn, my smile wide and stupid. How could I be so stupid?
I slam the photograph against the floor but the rug softens the
blow, so I raise it higher and bring it down onto the exposed wood
until I gouge its smooth varnished surface, until the glass in the
frame cracks and splinters. He could have taken the blame, told
his partners the mistake was his own. What would they have done?
Nothing. He had to know I would not stay at the firm and file
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
forms, that the insult would make me leave. Shards of glass slice my
hand. Blood drops onto the pine-board floor, forming an uneven
puddle.
I drop the photograph and cover my eyes with the heels of my
hands, pressing them into my lids. Will knows about my fitness
certificate. Does Ben? Is that why he resents me? Because I broke the
rules to get this job? I flouted waiting periods and used my Atlanta
connection to pull strings? If only he knew why. No, that would be
worse.
Fucking Henry. Why? What did I demand from him but small
portions of his time and heart? Tears of anger scald my cheeks. I
rock back and forth on my heels. I thought he loved me. Idiot girl.
re such a tiger,
 he murmured, half jesting, after a surprise
Wednesday night get-together. He traced the dip of my lower back
with his index finger. His eyes were sexed up, a brighter brown than
usual. 
Where did you learn to do those things?
You,
 I told him, staring through lowered lashes. He knew it to
be true. There was no one else. He saw the blood that first time.
I must be one hell of a professor,
 he said, tugging me onto his
chest.
I tear the picture through the glass, bisecting Henry
s torso. I will
rip it into confetti. I will destroy him. I tear it until the blood on my
hands causes my fingers to slip on the shiny surface of the paper. I
stare at the fragments.
I had a life, a plan, dreams, friends, parents, and I left them all.
He sat in his leather chair acting as if my career and life meant nothing to him and never had. I thought that moving to Macon, taking
this job, would show him, would prove I was better. Now here I
am, preparing a death sentence case with a cancerous partner. I sure
showed him.
My sinuses, my teeth, my chest, and my head hurt. I walk to the
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
bathroom. My reflection is ghastly. The cuts on my hand have left
bloody smears on my cheeks and underneath my nose. My eyelids
are so swollen it looks as though I
ve suffered an allergic reaction.
Mucus covers my upper lip in a clear moustache and the freckles
I earned outside are invisible on my red nose. My bloody hands
turn the water pink. So it begins, I think, and so it ends, with my
blood. And now, as then, I cannot help but think I deserve this. My
choices, all of them mine.
Chapter Sixteen
August 10, 2000
Thus far, on my drive to work, I have spotted two dead possums
and a cat whose corpse bore the tread marks of enormous tires. I
turn my attention from roadkill to what I will say to Ben when I see
him. I picture him, thumbs hooked behind his suspenders, chest
out like a robin prepared to sing. If I hold this image in my head
I won
t have to relive this morning: vacuuming the glass from my
floor, placing the torn bits of photograph into the trash bin, wiping
an overlooked blood smear from the bathroom sink. My bedroom
was a crime scene.
Before I began working for the DA, I never thought about what
happens to crime scenes after a crew processes them. Beyond the
dusting for fingerprints and search for expelled bullets, what use
could such an area have? I never considered who cleans the spilled
blood of the violently murdered or who replasters walls pocked
with bullets. Some people make their living sanitizing crime scenes,
transforming areas where corpses once lay back into ordinary living
rooms, kitchens, and bedrooms. I wonder how these people respond
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
when asked how their day went. 
Today I cleaned bits of brain from
the floorboards. How was your day?
My mind will not stay on Ben. Peripheral items keep catching
my attention. I start thinking of his paunchy belly and brown tasseled leather shoes and then my gaze is caught on the white gauze
mummifying my right hand. The shallow cuts were too numerous
to cover with small bandages, and too noticeable not to conceal. No
one will believe my story that I cut myself chopping vegetables if
they see my hand.
Sure enough, the gauzy hand draws questions. It begins with
George, downstairs, and continues all the way down my hall and
into my office. 
Potato accident,
 I tell Will as he slows his typical hallway dash to look at my hand. I wave him on his way with
a cheerful, 
t worry. You should see the other guy.
 He laughs
and moves on.
In my office there is a stack of paperwork in the middle of the
desk that I have no hope of clearing off by day
s end. I sigh and look
at the topmost sheet. A fireman
s statement from the arson case.
When was this delivered?
Are you adopting my filing methods?
 Ben stands inside my
doorway, just as I pictured him in my head, except for the vest that
replaces his suspenders. He must have a court appearance today.
I gesture to the pile. 
No. Unlike your office, my office is usually
pile-free.
So I
ve noticed.
 He rocks back on his heels. I search his face for
signs of illness, but see nothing in his jowly good-humored face.
What happened to your hand?
 he asks.
Vegetable-chopping accident. Potato.
He stares at the swath of bandages. 
You must have sliced yourself
good.
 He doesn
t sound displeased. 
Did you go to the hospital?
No need. Besides, I hate hospitals, don
t you?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Ben takes a moment to answer. 
No. Hospitals don
t scare me.
Oh, I
m not scared of them. I just don
t like them. They smell
like disenfectant and all that sterile white is hard on the eyes. Plus
there are all those people, waiting for news. It
s a breeding ground
for anxiety.
He shuffles back a step so he is half in, half out of the doorway. 
Hospitals aren
t pleasant,
 he concedes, 
but they serve their
purpose.
 Oh ho. He is uncertain. He never would have conceded
otherwise.
I suppose.
 I lift my hand and look at it as if for the first time.
Perhaps I should see somebody about this. Could you recommend
someone?
What?
 He reacts as if I have just asked him for the telephone
number of his cocaine dealer.
Oh, why bother? I
m sure it will heal fast enough. I
m young
and healthy.
 As the words leave my mouth I want to seize them
back. Ben looks a little pale. I am young and healthy. My elation
collapses with a pinprick of guilt. Whether I can see it or not, he
is ill. Yes, he annoys me and baits me and disregards my politics
with a shrug of distaste, but Ben has never hurt me. Although he
knows Judge Owens and could hurt me if . . . if what? If he told
Will I had an affair and that is the real reason I came to Macon?
Will, I suspect, would not care, as long as I continued working
hard.
We will meet at two o
clock then,
 Ben says. He leaves after I
murmur approval, unsure where I agreed to meet him. Probably his
office.
Judge Owens knows that there was an incident at Walters, MacLittle, and Tate. That I was accused of making a mistake for a large
client and that it was one of the partners (I refused to name which)
who was responsible. Whether he investigated further or conjec115
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
tured more, I do not know. It doesn
t matter. I try to balance a pencil on my undamaged palm, a Lacey trick, but the pencil falls after
a second. I try again.
It does not matter. Henry took advantage of me. I took advantage of Judge Owens
s connections, and now here I am, turning my bandaged hand back and forth, ignoring the beep of my
computer. It wants me to check my e-mails and appointments.
I tune out the noise from the hall: the ring of phones and thuds
of closing filing cabinets and chatter of people avoiding work
for a few moments. I stare at the white gauze, thick and almost
fluffy. Like the thick white marshmallow my mother put in my
hot cocoa.
I consider Ben and his relationship to the judge and decide it
no longer matters. Of course I never want Ben to know of my affair. God, no. But there are worse things. I place the eraser end of
the pencil on my left palm and move my hand back and forth. The
pencil stays upright for two seconds before it falls. Better than my
previous attempts. Satisfied, I turn to my work.
I shuffle my arson paperwork to the bottom of the pile and move
to the next case: the licorice thief. Helen
s pleas for clemency fell on
deaf ears. Not that she expected otherwise. The former Miss Georgia is talented, but you cannot strike a deal when the other party
knows you have nothing to offer. After our negotiations ended with
a promise to meet in court, Helen had spun around on her heels, an
effortless balancing trick that spoke of her beauty pageant days. If I
had attempted that maneuver in those heels I would have toppled
to the floor.
Are you going to the Georgia Trust auction next Thursday?
I wondered how she knew.
She rested her leather-bound organizer against her hip. 
It looks
good if local politicos show up, but I
m betting Will tapped some116
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
one from his office to go, and since you
re low man on the totem
pole . . .
Will had suggested several weeks ago that I be given the ticket
the district attorney
s office purchased for the auction. He had made
it sound like a privilege, one I would have felt churlish refusing.
Sucker.
Is it awful?
No. This year it
s at Hay House, to raise money for restorations.
There will be food, drinks, and an auction. Last year Judge Gaverly
bid six thousand dollars for a set of silk pajamas that belonged to
Elvis.
I blinked. Judge Gaverly was a very large man. He was also a
notorious tightfist who refused to pay his parking tickets, though
he deserved every one. He treated fire hydrants like parking meters
established for his exclusive use.
m going. Part of my community service, penance for my job.
Poor Helen. It could not be easy having a reputation as the representative of so many of Macon
s least desirables.
I asked about the dress code and Helen said, 
Black tie optional.
I am sure you have something suitable.
I did not understand her confidence in my wardrobe. My work
clothes were gray, brown, black, blue, and white, hanging stiff, as if
they might shrug off the hangers and walk out of the closet. Then
there were my sweatshirts, dresses, skirts, and corduroys in turquoise, magenta, purple, and black. I had never considered the dichotomy of my closet, but it appeared there were two Natalies living
in my house: lawyer Natalie and playtime Natalie. Playtime Natalie
needed to go shopping soon. Half of my clothes were approaching
antique status, although this was less a flaw here than elsewhere.
Georgians love all things old.
Before I have made it halfway through my paper pile it is two
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
clock. Time to meet Ben. I gather my things and head for his
office.
Good God, it looks like Hurricane Albert hit.
 Papers spill
onto the floor, beyond their normal lopsided piles, banker
s boxes
are gathered by the door, ready to trip unsuspecting visitors. His
desk has one clear patch where a small piece of paper might fit.
Surrounding this oasis are paper clips, rubber bands, pens, pencils,
notebooks, and sticky notes. It looks as though an office supply
store exploded.
Ben turns from an overstuffed closet. 
Oh. Is it two? I thought
we were meeting in your office.
I can see why. It
s ten past two. I was just wondering where you
were.
 This is, of course, a lie. I had not heard him say where we
were meeting.
ll be there in just a minute. I need to find a document for
tomorrow
s deposition.
I won
t hold my breath,
 I promise, doubting he can find anything in there 
in just a minute.
He surprises me by showing up at my office two minutes later, a
bottle of soda in his hand. 
Found it.
Congratulations.
He launches into pretrial talk. Jury selection is set for August
29, less than a month away. The defense
s eagerness to go to trial
surprised me. In their position I would have begged, borrowed, and
stolen every postponement I could get. They must rate their chances for victory greater than I do. We may not have the gun, but we
have a witness to Calvin Washington
s confrontation with Marcus
Rhodes, Calvin
s fingerprints within the school, and wooden splinters, presumably from the bat used to beat Marcus, found in his car.
There are blood spatters on several pieces of his clothing, consistent
with Marcus
s and Dominic
s blood types. Calvin
s hand was injured
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
and splinters removed from it. Pieces of the bat he wielded with
such power. He is guilty as hell.
Ben tells me about the chief defense counsel, Thomas Landry.
s a sharp one. His father is a federal judge whose name was bandied about as a Supreme Court nominee in 1991 before Clarence
Thomas.
 I fail to see how his father
s consideration to the Supreme
Court makes Thomas Landry a sharp one, but that just shows I
not a Georgian. A person is defined by 
their people
 in Georgia,
a concept that would not seem unfamiliar to a Jew who grew up
outside Boston, where 
your people
 were a small group. However,
by people, Georgians mean family, family they can trace back to
William the Conqueror and beyond.
I look up because I realize the low hum of sound, of Ben
talking, has stopped. He is frowning at me, the small crease line
between his brows visible. It
s always there, that line, but only
apparent when he frowns. I bet I have seen more of that frown
line than anyone.
Sorry.
s atypical of me to apologize, but it was rude of me to
stop listening and I should be paying attention and he looks a little
pale. His stomach, an overfilled balloon, seems to have leaked some
air. Has he lost weight? Is it the cancer, or fear of it, that has caused
his pants to sit a tiny bit lower than their usual Humpty Dumpty
position? Before he can continue I blurt, 
Rudy Giuliani had prostate cancer.
He sighs and rubs his large hand over his face as if it is a chalkboard he is trying to erase. 
Will told you.
Yes.
 I hold back the 
you should have.
Look, I
m going to be fine. The doctors say so, and I don
t wish
to discuss my health with everyone in town.
I am not everyone. I am your cocounsel. You should have told
me, if only so that I could plan our schedules. Instead you tell me
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
nothing, disappear for days, and get crabby when Will finally informs me what you should have told me weeks ago.
 So much for
holding it in. 
Look,
 I begin, ready to backtrack.
 he interrupts. 
re right.
 He stares in the direction of
my earlobes. 
I should have told you. I just
s okay.
 I wave my hand in a gesture I adopted at Walters,
MacLittle, and Tate. It means 
Whatever, no problem, it
s fixable.
 I learned it from my fellow associates who used to wave
away little things like missed calls from spouses and mislaid documents but who would turn tomato red with rage if a typo appeared on their embossed business cards. I hate that I still use
that gesture. I have tried to quit but my hand moves independent
of my will.
Good God, Goldberg, don
t you start.
 He withdraws a packet
of peanuts from his pocket.
Start what?
 I watch as he opens the package and dumps the
contents into his soda. The soda bubbles as the peanuts fall through
the liquid to settle at the bottom.
Being nice because I
m sick.
 He sounds fatigued. I wonder
how much false sympathy he has borne, carrying the burden of
other
s politic politeness.
m nice all the time,
 I tell him.
He cocks his head to one side and widens his eyes, begging for
an example.
All the time except when I
m in court or at the bargaining table
or behind someone who can
t make up their mind as to what flavor
iced coffee they want or . . . with you.
Uh-huh.
 I envy his ability to invest two syllables with more
meaning than I can wrest from seventeen.
He takes a swallow of his soda. Ewwwww.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
You want to discuss our relationship some more or you want to
discuss this case?
 I ask.
We don
t have a relationship.
 He pronounces it 
ree-lay-shunship
 and it takes him five seconds to say.
We don
 I stop tapping my pencil against the desk.
No, we don
Darn. I guess this means I should cancel that order for matching handkerchiefs. I thought you could wear yours in your breast
pocket and I could wear mine as a headband. We could be supertwins in court.
Ben stays silent. His cheek tightens. I assume he is repressing a
smile because he never suppresses grimaces.
He fishes in his leather binder and withdraws a long blue envelope. 
Here. This got misdirected to my office, and I opened it
without looking.
Though it is addressed to me, the handwriting is shaky and difficult to read. I withdraw the card from inside.
Dear Natalie,
Thank you for the beautiful flowers. They brightened my room
for over a week! Sorry for the delay, but that operation tuckered
me out. I
m on the mend now, though. I shall keep you in my
prayers.
Mrs. Clay Biddle
 I say. Did Ben read this? Does he wonder why I sent Mrs.
Biddle flowers? I shove the note into my out box.
Ben clears his throat with two loud harrumphs. 
That was nice
of you, sending her flowers.
Well, that answers that question. He read the note.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Told you I
m a softie,
 I say.
He harrumphs again before saying, 
The defense is going to
press hard on the time element.
Why?
Because they have a witness who says Calvin Washington wasn
at the elementary school at six-thirty p.m.
 He takes another swallow of his peanut-flavored soda. I wince.
Where does the witness say he was?
A gas station outside Columbus.
What do you think?
The witness is wrong. Washington is our killer.
I tap my pencil against my notepad. 
So we prove the witness
wrong. What else?
 My pulse is beating a salsa tempo in my hands.
It is the rush that accompanies a new challenge.
We need to look into the murder weapon. It
s gone, but I
would like to document Washington
s relationship to guns. Prior
ownership.
You know I have a hard time imagining our Founding Fathers meant to include semiautomatic handguns under the Second
Amendment.
 I speak from long-established habit, taking up the
handgun-control flag and waving it whenever possible.
Ben, a card-carrying NRA member, grunts and says, 
So I
ll assume you would like to tackle that project. Be sure to spread the
word among the gun dealers you encounter.
Ugh. Gun dealers. 
I will,
 I promise. 
You think I should bring
some petitions for them to sign?
 I contort my face into my best
dumb-girl expression. He just shakes his head. My own cheek tightens with a repressed smile.
What does that taste like?
 I gesture toward his drink. I cannot
resist asking.
This?
 he says. 
Soda and peanuts? A true Southern treat.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
They say Jimmy Carter drank this. He was a peanut farmer from
Georgia.
I know. He was also a Democrat.
Nobody
s perfect,
 Ben says before taking another swig.
Ugh,
 I say, causing him to smile.
re back, just like before.
Chapter Seventeen
August 13, 2000
I lean my elbows onto the kitchen tabletop and reach for the stack
of bills awaiting payment. I write out a check for Georgia Power
Company. On the portion of the bill I retain, I note how much
I paid, with which number check, and on what date. The same
information goes into my checkbook. I file the bills, alphabetically,
into an accordion folder. Check number #1131 for $58.04 paid on
August 13, 2000. I put the bill receipt and check into the envelope,
lick the gummy seal and run my finger against the surface, hard. I
use standard U.S. flag stamps, because it seems silly to send stamps
with hearts or Elvis faces. The same way it has always seemed absurd
to buy personalized checks with animals or sports logos on them.
Why would you want to make the act of payment a warm and
fuzzy one?
As I flip the register page over in my checkbook I see a note for
Rose Factory
 dated June 11. My mother
s birthday gift, sent three
days late. I procrastinated about choosing a gift and then sent her
roses. Clich
 at best, but I could not intuit anything she needed or
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
even wanted, except for me to move back to Cambridge. So I sent a
birthday bouquet of pink roses. She called to say thank you the next
day. It was an awkward conversation, made more so by the fact that
I could hear my father in the background. He refused to come to
the phone, pleading he would talk to me 
another time.
I scan the pages of my checkbook register. There is a lot of activity in the summer of 1999. There are the checks to the movers, rent
checks, checks for new furniture, towels, and dishes, a new life. I
frown at a few entries. 
BBQ Barn
 where I got my first real taste of
anti-Yankee sentiment. The manager tried to refuse my check, but
the restaurant didn
t take American Express and I had three dollars
on me. He stared at my all-black outfit and muttered something
about cheap Northerners.
Another check paid for 
Temple Beth Shalom,
 my family
s synagogue. Despite the fact I live hundred of miles away and thus cannot attend services, I still send money for membership. My ticket
for the High Holiday admission gets filed in a small, jeweled box my
mother gave me years ago. I cannot bring myself to throw the tickets out. It feels sacrilegious. Adultery and lying I can do but temple
ticket disposal, no. Idiocy, thy name is Natalie Ruth Goldberg.
A swallow of coffee laced with brandy sears my chest. I raise my
cup in silent tribute to Lala, who introduced me to this after-dinner
drink. She credits her good health to it, and claims that her mother
and grandmother supported its medicinal qualities. I take another
hit and smile. Medicine, indeed.
I wonder if Ben is taking any medicines. The Merck Manual sits
on my bookshelf, ready to be consulted. I had planned to look up
prostate cancer, to understand what it attacks, how it can be treated,
but I have not opened the book yet. Is it fear that keeps me from
looking? Or an unwillingness to concentrate my attention on what
is happening inside Ben
s body?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
The last dregs of coffee and brandy impart fleeting warmth. I
pick up my pen to write the remainder of the checks. Rent, gas,
cable television, credit card, my subscription to The National Law
Journal, telephone, and car insurance. I cannot help the smile from
tugging at my lips. Macon may be many things, but expensive it is
not. After paying twice as much in rent for a one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan, my monthly rent for a two-bedroom house
seems ludicrous. I chew my lip, recalling the conversation I had
with my landlady last month. She asked if I would consider buying
the house.
Mrs. Miller, widowed with three children, lives with her oldest
daughter in Milledgeville, a few towns over. She is a sweet lady with
a shell of white hair lacquered harder than any helmet. She lived in
this house with her husband after he retired from his job as a civil
engineer with the department of public works. They lived here four
years before he died. After that, she moved in with her daughter
and began renting the place out. I was delighted to find something
so spacious and so close to work, but the idea of owning it, of buying property in Macon, knocked the breath from me. When Mrs.
Miller telephoned to ask if I might wish to buy it I had dithered,
saying I would consider it.
I rub the raised hand-stenciled ivy print on the table with my
fingers and consider her offer. The house is forty years old and well
maintained. The neighborhood is safe. The school attached to this
district is excellent. What am I thinking? I am not raising a family
here, for God
s sake. I don
t even own a cat. I gather the paid bills
and settle them into a neat pile. I put the stamps in the kitchen
basket that holds odds and ends: pens, paper clips, tape, and scissors. I touch the woven wood of the basket, my eyes focused on the
pale blue wall behind it. The paints in this place are perfect. Yellow
in the living room, pale blue in the kitchen, cream in the bedroom
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
with just a touch of peach. Soft colors, nothing loud and no anonymous white. It
s a nice house with lots of closets.
The accordion folder of bills gets returned to the 
sewing room
as Mrs. Miller calls it. I transformed it into my personal office and
library. Beside a small two-drawer desk stands a bookcase filled with
legal reference books, a few dictionaries, fiction paperbacks, and
established literary tomes from college. My gaze falls to a volume
wedged between Corporation Law and the The Chicago Manual of
Style. Righting Wrongs: Important Cases in American Civil Liberties,
edited by Aaron Goldberg. It was published when I was twelve. I
made him sign my copy. He wrote: To my daughter Natalie, future
people
s champion. With much love from your father. I stare at the
book and breathe in and out, listening for something, anything.
Nothing happens. I turn away and close the door.
Chapter Eighteen
August 17, 2000
Tonight the open windows and doors of Hay House are just adequate to cool the people circulating through the expansive downstairs rooms. Constructed in the 1850s, Hay House is known for
its early 
air-conditioning
 ventilation system and central heating,
conveniences unheard of in houses of that period. Of course, most
houses of the period didn
t cost a hundred thousand dollars or have
five-hundred-pound wooden front doors painted to resemble metal.
These are some of the features that make Hay House special, and
compel people to bid on auctioned items tonight. That is the declared purpose anyway: to restore the house. I suspect people came
to socialize, to see and be seen, and because there is an excitement
about auctions, the element of surprise.
According to Mrs. Mary Hale, director of the central library in
Macon, one of the surprises is the donation of a painting by an unidentified celebrity. Once the final bid is accepted, the winner will
be informed of the artist
s identity. Mrs. Hale informs me, between
delicate bites of sliced fruit, that she does not know the identity of
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the painter, but she does know that the painter is famous for another type of art.
Movies?
 I ask.
Perhaps. People are wild for movie stars nowadays.
I adore how she makes this seem a modern concept.
Mrs. Hale has shed her usual plaid suit for a vivid peach dress
with matching handbag. Women in pinks, fuchsias, and yellows
surround me.
Nice outfit,
 Helen says, tapping my right shoulder. I smile
hello, relieved by her arrival. 
Very New York.
 She nods a greeting
to Mrs. Hale who returns the nod.
My dress is a black knee-length silk sheath. 
My friend Lacey
calls black 
urban camouflage,
 I tell her.
She fingers my hand-dyed purple and red scarf. 
Beautiful.
Where did you get it?
Lacey gave it to me. Birthday present.
 The scarf makes anything look chic.
Well, you won
t blend in, at any rate.
 Helen surveys the crowd.
She looks over most heads in the room. In heels, she is six feet tall.
Oh, my,
 she murmurs. 
Oh, my. Have you seen Mrs. McKinney?
Mrs. McKinney?
 The name sounds familiar but I can
t recall why.
Town council member, headed for the fruit tray. Just wait.
Helen watches me watch Mrs. McKinney approach the mango and
pineapple. I do not understand Helen
s interest. Mrs. McKinney
looks of average height and medium build and middle age. She
turns to spear a slice of watermelon and I gasp. Mrs. McKinney
dress descends into a vee that ends near her waist.
Who ordered the mutton dressed as lamb?
 Helen murmurs. A
snort of laughter escapes me.
s grab a drink and some canap
s before they disappear.
 She
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
grabs my wrist and tugs me forward. 
I haven
t eaten all day.
 I follow her through the marble hall and into the next room where three
bartenders stand behind a table. One of them is white, which amuses me. The majority of attendees are black, reflecting the makeup
of Macon. The last U.S. Census put the ratio at 63 percent African
American and 35 percent white. I have grown used to being outnumbered, but in this room, with so many bare-shouldered women,
I do feel conspicuously pale.
Helen, paler than me, with her beacon of blond hair, seems not
to notice. She is busy getting a mint julep and signaling one of the
servers to bring the hors d
oeuvres tray to her. Delighted to be the
object of her attention, he hurries forward and stumbles over the foot
of a man who stands talking with two other men. The server recovers, and neither of the men, dressed in dark suits and bow ties, says
anything. Helen unloads four treats from the silver tray onto a small
plate. I take a miniature asparagus tart. Helen warns the server 
to go far
 in a voice that threatens violence. Three minutes later, her
appetizers are gone.
You really didn
t eat, did you?
 I ask.
Nope,
 she says, rolling her eyes toward the stenciled ceiling.
The gesture, combined with her loose hair, makes her look much
younger. 
I was in court until four, and then I got a call from a client
who had just been picked up on charges of assaulting his brotherin-law.
 Carl
s face flashes in my mind, although I know it can
t be
him. He is in Bermuda now, sipping a frothy drink and watching
the ocean waves crash onto shore. 
Thank God I had my dress with
me. I showered and changed at the office and came straight here.
Your office has a shower?
Uh-huh. It gets a lot of use.
 She approaches the server who
remained close by. Helen relieves his silver platter of two more crab
puffs.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
So you
re in it for the glamour, then?
 I ask.
Huh?
Law. I assume there
s a reason you chose it.
re such a Yankee.
 She softens the comment with a smile.
Most people down here just say, 
So what
s a pretty girl like you
doing working?
I think women should work
Super-Yankee,
 she interrupts.
I just wondered why you chose law.
Over, say, modeling?
She seems determined to find insults in my questions.
I tried it. I even moved to New York City.
 She grimaces, causing tiny lines to fan from her eyes. 
I lasted seven months. All that
noise, all those people, all those rules. Don
t eat this. Don
t eat that.
t eat, period.
She swallows the last of her crab puffs. I can see where the noeating rule would disagree with her.
I hated it, so I came home. Went to UGA. Then my father got
busted for burglary and that
s when I decided to become a lawyer.
So the next time my dad ended up in the pokey we wouldn
t have to
spend the mortgage payment on lawyer
s fees.
Your father was convicted of burglary?
 My voice squeaks. I am
stunned.
Several. Car theft, burglary, manslaughter. You hadn
t heard? I
thought for sure your pals at the DA would have told you all about
the daughter of Jimmy Two Times.
Jimmy Two Times?
That was his nickname. My father. He used to have this habit
of rapping the table two times when he had a great poker hand. He
was an awful card player. You really hadn
t heard?
 It surprises me that such choice gossip should have es132
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
caped my ears. While nice to believe professional respect curbed
my colleagues
 tongues, it is unlikely. More believable is that people
expected I had heard the tale from someone else.
I did hear all about your Miss Georgia victory, though.
The stories of my triumph are exaggerated,
 she drawls, batting
her eyelashes.
A soft tap on my shoulder interrupts our conversation.
Excuse me,
 a soft voice apologizes. I pivot to find a black
couple standing before me. I know the woman. Dominic
s mother.
She wears a black dress and looks much older than the last time I
saw her. Deep ruts are carved around her mouth. The man beside
her holds her elbow and must be her husband. He stands a foot
taller, wearing a deep gray suit and white dress shirt that matches
the white patches of hair at his temples.
Yes?
Are you Natalie Goldberg?
 she asks.
Yes.
From the DA
s office?
 She is uncertain, as if there is a pack of
Goldbergs running about Macon.
I nod. 
I thought so,
 she says, half to her husband, half to herself. 
m Emily Brown, and this is my husband, Douglas.
What to say? I know who you are. I am terribly sorry for your loss.
Miss Goldberg,
 he says, his voice deep and smooth, like syrup.
I believe you are handling our son
s case.
Yes, I am. The chief counsel is my colleague Ben Maddox. Do
you know him?
 The Browns shake their heads. I look about the
room as if Ben will appear. 
s not here.
 I lower my voice. 
I am
very sorry for your loss.
We just wanted to say thank you,
 Emily says, reaching forward
to grasp my hand. Her skin is dry and cool, too cool, as if her blood
has ceased circulating.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I met you once,
 The words spill out of me, in a rush. 
You and
your son. At the Piggly Wiggly.
She puzzles over this. I say, 
He was practicing his magic.
 she murmurs. 
Oh yes. Yes.
 Tears gather at the corners
of her eyes.
We know you will see that our boy
s murderer is brought to justice,
 her husband says. 
For whoso sheddeth man
s blood, by man
shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.
is a Baptist minister. That was in the report.
I cannot bear to look at his eyes, bright with grief and vengeance.
What can I say to this couple, aged prematurely by grief? 
ll do
my best.
Douglas squeezes his wife
s elbow and she grips my hand again,
cutting the blood flow to my fingers. 
ll keep you in our prayers,
she promises. They leave, heading for the hall.
Oh, my,
 Helen murmurs, arching her shaped brows at me. 
hadn
t thought they would come tonight.
I monitor their progress through the house. People are keeping
their distance, as if the Browns are contagious.
They are active with local preservation causes. He is on the
board of directors of the Tubman House. They haven
t been out
much since Dominic died.
I sigh, aware that people are watching me. Their eyes feel like
fingers, tickling my neck and shoulders. I shrug, as if I can dislodge
their attention.
You okay?
 Helen asks.
I could use a drink.
 I head for the bartenders and the promise
of an antidote.
We collect our drinks
another mint julep for Helen and a gin
and tonic for me
and head for the music room where the auction
is to be held.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Wooden folding chairs stand in ten rows, with a small aisle in
between. It looks like preparations for a wedding ceremony, except
that at the front of the white and gold wallpapered room, instead of
an altar, is a podium and table. To the left stands an empty easel.
Wonder what the subject is?
 Helen asks, pointing toward the
easel with her auction paddle, which resembles a wooden Ping-Pong
paddle. Hers has 41 painted in black on it. Mine has 18, colored red.
Impressionist landscape?
 I say.
m guessing nude self-portrait.
I am saved from pointing out that a self-portrait would make
the identity of the painter less than secret by the thunk-thunk of the
gavel against the podium. Mayor Barry Sims stands at the podium,
dressed in a pin-striped suit. His wide face, always smiling, reminds
me of a black Santa.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, and thank you for coming to Hay House tonight. As you know, we Maconians love this
structure, not only because it
s beautiful but because it brings us
tourist dollars.
 A titter of laughter ripples outward across the room.
And tonight we hope to raise funds to ensure that this historic
home will be enjoyed by future generations of visitors. So, please
enjoy yourself and overbid!
Another small wave of laughter breaks. I survey the rows of chairs
before me. I do not see the dark-clad figures of the Browns. Perhaps
they did not stay for the auction. The idea that they came to see me
makes me tug at my dress hem.
The event organizers have hired a real auctioneer, one of those
men who warble words into guttural strings of sounds. It
s hard
to follow, so I simply watch the paddles go up and down, up and
down, like horses on a carousel. When a set of pig bookends is set at
the table up front I giggle, but the noise goes unnoticed. Women sit
straighter in their chairs and a buzz of low whispers fills the room,
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
like static from a badly tuned radio. Helen leans toward me to say,
They
re Carlton Ware.
 I assume she is referring to the pigs.
The auctioneer announces the merchandise. 
A pristine set of
Carlton Ware pink pig bookends.
 I let another giggle escape. I cannot help it. The little pig, bisected in half by a maroon volume used
to display the purpose of the bookends, is too funny.
This little piggy went to auction, I think.
I am amazed to hear the bidding open at twenty-five dollars,
and am further astonished when half of the paddles in the room are
raised, like the hands of overachieving schoolchildren. Helen raises
her paddle twice, but drops out when the bidding reaches sixty dollars. My jaw lowers as the caller says, 
Ninety, ma
am, ninety, thank
you, ninety-five?
 It feels like I have run a race when he calls out,
One hundred thirty-five, sold to Mrs. Francis, for one hundred
thirty-five.
 I exhale in a rush of breath.
What was all the fuss for?
 I demand of Helen, who is applauding for tiny Mrs. Francis, whose shiny cocoa face beams with delight at having won her prize. Her husband, seated beside her, looks
nonplussed.
Carlton Ware is very popular. The company went out of business
in the eighties, but their stuff 
s value has gone through the roof. Have
you ever seen their eggcups with the little feet at the bottom?
I think she must be pulling my leg, playing some sort of
pin-the-joke-on-the-Yankee.
Guess not,
 she says and I realize she is serious. Eggcups with
feet. How bizarre.
The auctioneer pulls a small jewelry box from behind the piggy
bookends. 
Ladies and gentlemen, for lovers of fine jewelry we have
a beautiful one-carat ruby ring set in eighteen-karat filigree. This
item was available for examination during the prebid show. A beautiful ring, fit for a queen. Let us start the bidding at fifty dollars. Do
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I have fifty dollars? Fifty dollars? Fifty dollars here, thank you. Sixty
dollars, yes, thank you.
My eyes never waver from the box holding the ring. I remember
the small scar Henry had at his temple from where a horse kicked
him. He quit smoking two years before we met. His hair felt softer
than it looked. He did not enjoy the movies. He was left-handed
and allergic to strawberries.
The ruby looks small from my seat, but I know it is big enough
to reach my knuckle. Henry liked knock-knock jokes. His right foot
was bigger than his left.
Two hundred and fifty dollars.
 He loved animals, especially
horses, despite his near-death encounter. His favorite season was
winter. He sang off-key. He preferred his shirts starched.
Three hundred dollars.
 He liked to give presents more than he
liked receiving them. He said 
gesundheit
 when he heard someone
sneeze. He called me Lee when we were together.
Three hundred and seventy-five dollars. Sold!
 The gavel closes
the bidding. It is over, at last.
I shift in my seat and look about the room. Mrs. McKinney
cleavage is drawing stares. Helen notices. 
Perhaps she is planning
to offer them up to the highest bidder. I hear her marriage is on the
skids.
That
s awful,
 I chastise, smoothing the hem of my dress.
Speaking of people in the market, how
s the office hunk?
 she
asks, causing me to squint at her. Is she drunk?
Huh? What office hunk?
 I blow a stray curl off my brow using
a short blast of breath from the corner of my mouth.
Carl Andrews.
You know Carl?
Not as well as I
d like to know him. He
s the type I wouldn
kick out of bed for eating crackers.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Yeah, and he has more tics than a dirty dog in summer,
 I say. I
cover my mouth, a guilt reflex.
Nerves? I
ve never noticed. He always seems calm in court.
I shrug. I have seen Carl in court just once. He prosecutes the sex
crimes, and I try to stay away from those cases.
s a good guy,
 I add, feeling bad for my prior comment.
Helen looks about the room. 
Not many of them around these
days.
That good, huh?
Even worse,
 she answers. 
 She grabs my arm. 
I think
they
re bringing in the painting now!
Everyone in the room has turned to look at the rear doors
through which we entered. Two men carry a large rectangle covered in blue velvet. As they walk down the aisle I resist the urge to
hum the 
Wedding March.
 Instead, I watch people stir. The auctioneer carefully settles the painting on the easel. The cacophony
dies to a few whispers, loud in the near silence. When all noise
has been vacuumed from the room, the auctioneer casts aside the
fabric to reveal a series of lines and circles, painted in bright primary colors upon a blank canvas. The room appears to be holding
its breath. Whatever we were expecting, it wasn
t a third-rate Pollock study.
I worry that Macon
s celebrity donation isn
t going to pay off,
not like Elvis
s pajamas. But several paddles go up when the bidding
begins at one thousand dollars.
s hideous,
 Helen says. 
My five-year-old niece can do
better!
Yes, but is she a celebrity?
 I ask, as the bidding rises to thirtyfive hundred dollars. The two fiercest competitors are Miss Wilcox,
who made a fortune marketing cosmetics for African Americans in
the 1960s, and a white man I don
t recognize.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
s that?
 I ask, pointing my paddle toward the goateed
bidder.
Gregory Hurcombe, a real estate mogul in Atlanta. His parents
are from Macon. He likes to throw money around for good causes.
Makes him feel important.
 The venom in her tone makes me wonder how she knows him, but I don
t ask, too busy watching Miss
Wilcox
s paddle rise in opposition to Mr. Hurcombe
Sold to Mr. Hurcombe for fifteen thousand dollars.
Chump change considering it
s a celebrity-created work of
art, but a fortune when one takes a close look at said art. I hope
Hurcombe considers it worth the money when he finds out who
painted it. I set my paddle on the now empty chair beside me and
rise. My legs are stiff. I need to get to bed.
People are beginning to clear the room, some muttering comments about the 
terrible painting.
 These people know bad art
when they see it.
Helen yawns, belatedly raising her hand to cover her mouth. I
half expect her to rub her eyes, as overtired children do. Instead she
tucks a strand of blond hair behind her ear with unstudied grace.
Are you parked outside?
 she asks. I nod.
Me, too. I
ll walk with you.
We exit the room, following in the wake of the crowd before
us. It seems the event was a success. I overhear the auction
s total
estimated at $53,000. This will go toward refinishing the house
two-story octagonal cupola. Once we are far enough away from the
house to view it from the drive, I look at the cupola
s gleaming white
exterior. It stands high above the surrounding trees, magnolias, and
cedars that date back to the nineteenth century.
It really is lovely,
 I murmur.
I used to hate touring this place as a kid,
 Helen confesses. Our
feet crunch on the gravel. 
I had read some Nancy Drew mystery
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
set in a mansion that scared the bejesus out of me, and I pictured
Hay House when I read it. So having to go upstairs and look into
the rooms was awful.
 She laughs. 
Pretty silly now, but it seemed
terrible at the time.
I can imagine. Nancy Drew used to scare me, too.
 I pause
beside a clump of flowers bordering the path. The deep red of their
roselike petals glows even in the pale light. 
I wonder what these
are?
Confederate rose. Hibiscus mutabilis,
 she says.
I wonder why I bother to ask, 
Are you a gardener?
Claimed the Macon Fair
s blue ribbon for lilies two years in a
row,
 she singsongs.
m just learning. My neighbor, Lala, has been teaching me all
about plants and flowers.
Lala Dayton? I know her! She always has beautiful cuttings at
the garden swap.
The garden behind her house is gorgeous. It smells like
heaven.
Good God, I hope no one overhears us talking flowers,
 she
says, looking over her shoulder for potential eavesdroppers. 
s bad
enough we
re female. No reason to load the gun for them.
Them
are men, and I know what she means.
Oh, my gun
s been loaded with the safety off since I got here. A
Goldberg from Boston.
You never had a chance,
 she agrees. We stop beside a silver
Honda. 
This is me,
 she says. I expected a flashier car, something
more Miss Georgia.
I had a good time.
 I feel silly, making end-of-the-night date
sounds.
Me, too, Nat. Maybe we can get together and talk garden shop
sometime.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
d like that,
 I say, and I would. Even more, I like that she
called me Nat.
Driving home I realize that I have forgotten who won the auction for the ruby ring. I wish that person better luck with it than
I had.
Chapter Nineteen
August 23, 2000
You don
t find it strange?
 I am incredulous, not only at Ben
s position but at his mulish refusal to see it my way.
Wait. You don
t think that it is at all arbitrary?
What are you getting at, Goldberg?
What I
m getting at is how warped it is. I mean, the Georgia General Assembly voted to change the death penalty from the
electric chair to lethal injection, but instead of saying everyone on
death row dies by needle they say only those who are convicted of a
capital crime that they committed after May first get the needle. For
everyone else it
s the chair, including Mr. Calvin Washington. There
is no choice involved.
Prisoners aren
t usually given a choice.
But it
s absurd to have two systems! One which is perceived as
more humane, although I
m not sure it is, and the other which some
argue is barbaric and violates Fourteenth Amendment rights. I don
favor either, but why not choose one?
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Ben swallows a bite of his sandwich and levels me with a look.
It is supposed to shut me up. After a few moments he sighs, rubs
his face, and says, 
Some members of the assembly were arguing for
the change because they knew the electric chair might be ruled unconstitutional in the future, and they wanted to safeguard the death
penalty by adopting lethal injection. Those same people might not
have felt it was a better option.
He is honest. 
s still nuts,
 I say.
Goldberg, we are working on a case, right?
Right.
 I look at my watch. Nine-thirty p.m. Most people have
been home for hours.
How did the gun dealers work out?
 Ben asks.
Go fish,
 I tell him.
Pardon?
I found one guy who identified Washington as a potential customer, but he didn
t give me anything better than that he had seen
him before and that Washington never bought anything. Too cheap,
he said.
ll forget the gun, then. The defense will make a fuss, but if
we appear to take it as seriously as they do then it looks bad that we
t find it.
We have the baseball splinters,
 I remind him. Plus blood-type
matches of the victims on Washington
s clothes. He claims it
s his
friend
s blood, the result of a kitchen mishap. I will enjoy watching
the defense try to sell that story.
He takes another bite of his sandwich. The tofu special I got
delivered is pathetic next to Ben
s toasted bread smeared with mayonnaise and heaped with bright red tomatoes, lettuce, and wonderful-smelling bacon. I really wanted a roast beef sandwich but I
thought watching his face react to my tofu would be even better.
My stomach disagrees.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Ben wipes his mouth with a thin paper napkin and I marvel at
how awful he looks. His face is covered by mossy stubble, half blond,
half gray, that looks on the soft side of fuzzy. There are small bald
spots where it appears no hair can grow near his jawline. Not like
my father, who awakens with a new forest of black facial hair each
morning and who shaves twice a day while appearing in court.
I try to forget my father and concentrate on Ben
s lips, which
are moving. No sound seems to be issuing from them. We are an
absurd sleep-deprived pair. Unshaven, gray-faced Ben murmuring,
and slow-minded zombie me unable to make my ears work. Dumb
and dumber.
Has anyone ever told you that you look like the sheriff from In
the Heat of the Night?
 I ask. Why pretend I heard a word he said?
Yes.
 I decide to return to talking trial, as he seems uninterested
in my opinion of his appearance. 
I think we should break the possible alibi last.
 I have wanted to run this by him, though I am sure
he will find a way to discredit my idea.
Why not first?
 Just as I expected.
The alibi is the defense
s best hope. We have piles of physical
evidence, but if they can make the jurors believe that Washington
couldn
t have been at the school at the time of the murders then
they have won reasonable doubt. I think we should leave it alone,
until the end. When we show them it
s no good, it will erase any
doubt in the jurors
 heads. To them, it will seem all over. By that
point the defense will have nothing to counter with.
I rub grit from my eyes. It sounds good. I try to envision what
the defense will think when we don
t push back hard on the time
element early on. Will they think we are indifferent, lazy, or stupid?
Hell, let them think all three. Playing dumb can be a great strategy.
Okay,
 Ben says. 
You take on Abraham Gentry.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
You want to do it this way, you take on the man giving the alibi.
I am stunned and terrified. Abraham Gentry is a key witness for
the defense. I had not expected to cross-examine any witnesses. 
you sure?
 I want to kick myself for asking.
Yes. Just one thing.
Yes?
t screw it up.
 His eyes bore into mine and I realize that
failing before Ben would be worse than losing this case.
Does that stuff taste like anything?
 He gestures toward my
tofu. It sits in a bed of wilted greens, covered in a sauce that contains
MSG and little else.
Not really,
 I admit.
Carl was eating some the other day.
 He makes it sound as if
there is a tofu epidemic in the office and fears he may be its next
victim.
Carl looks good. Very tan, very relaxed,
 I say. Carl returned to
the office two days ago from his Bermuda vacation, his teeth blindingly white against his darker skin.
Lucky bastard,
 Ben grumbles and I smile. We have all told
Carl how good he looks and how happy we are to see him and we
are all thinking 
lucky bastard
 in our heads. Leave it to Ben to
say it.
I just got his postcard yesterday. Why is it postcards arrive after
people have returned from their vacations?
 I ask.
You got a postcard?
 It seems Ben didn
t. I try to keep from
blushing, and fail.
He stares at me for a moment before saying, 
Postcards take so
long because all the mailmen read them.
 Funny, but Lacey says the
very same thing.
We only have one copy of the Gentry testimony,
 he says, root146
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
ing around in one of his many legal boxes marked washington
in bold black letters. He hands me a bound sheaf of papers with
Abraham Gentry
s name on top. 
Why don
t you make a copy for
yourself ?
It is ten o
clock at night and there are no secretaries or interns
about to photocopy, but I still can
t help saying, 
Darf min gehn in
kolledj?
What?
 he says.
I don
t bother to translate my Yiddish complaint of 
For this I
went to college?
 for him. Why is it I only speak Yiddish around
Ben? Maybe because all my favorite phrases involve complaints or
laments and he evokes them all.
The copy machine hums and groans after I punch its buttons.
This machine looks older than I am, and is nothing like the hightech gadgets of my former Manhattan office. Will once joked that
the difference between public and corporate law was the difference
between a piggy bank and a chain of national banks.
I refill my paper cup of water from the cooler, noting that once
again I have managed to eke the last cup out. I never change the
water bottles. They are too heavy.
When I return to his office Ben
s eyes are closed and a soft snuffling issues from his open lips. I think about leaving, returning to
my office, and letting him sleep. I could put his coat over him. I
hesitate. He breathes a bit louder, more of a snort. I hold the sheaf
of papers two feet above his desk and let them drop. Bang! Ben
head jerks, his eyes roll about, and he yells, 
What? What?
 One of
these days I will grow up, but not today.
Here are your originals,
 I say, and smile.
Oh, right.
 He reaches for them, squints at them as if he has
forgotten what they are, and then returns them to the box behind
his desk.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Where were we?
You were sleeping while I was doing grunt work.
You call that grunt work?
 He sits up in his chair and points a
pen in the direction of his door. 
When I first got here, I was fresh
out of college. Guvnor used to call me into his office every morning.
He would sit at his giant desk and stare at his fingernails. He was
the only man I knew who had manicures. Apparently he played the
piano and liked for his hands to always look good.
 Ben squints at
the door, seeing something I cannot, as it is in his past.
Anyway, Guvnor used to ask me a question every day. Law questions. Sometimes criminal, often not. If I got it wrong he would
send me out to tell Sally, his secretary, to fetch him a cup of coffee.
If I got it right, the coffee order was canceled or he would call Sally
himself.
So Sally knew whether you got the question right or wrong.
Yes, and she would tell the whole office. I later learned there
was a betting pool, with a calendar. People chose days and placed
bets on whether I would get it right or wrong.
I try to imagine Ben, younger, sweating it out in front of what is
now my desk, aware that if he answered incorrectly the whole office
would know and some would even profit from it.
After a while I realized Guvnor
s questions were related to my
current cases. In some ways, he was helping me, making me think
of topics and precedents I would have overlooked if he had not
quizzed me on them.
So you enjoyed it?
He rolls his eyes. 
I hated it. But I learned a lot.
Sort of like working with you? I don
t say it, but I think it, and
I suspect he knows.
I suppose we should call it a night. You have the Gentry papers.
Study them in the next few days.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Okay.
 I hide a yawn behind my hand.
He throws away his dinner remains, bits of potato chips and lettuce pieces that escaped his sandwich. I watch, almost too tired to
rise. Pieces of paper napkin and chips miss the rim of his wastebasket. The cleaning staff must love him.
He knocks over a picture and I pick it up. An older man wearing a fedora, carrying a big gun, with a dead tiger slung over his
shoulder. Yikes.
My grandfather.
 He takes the photo and puts it back. 
liked to hunt big game. Shot six rhinos and an elephant.
My nose crinkles in automatic disgust. Then I remember something guaranteed to top that tale. 
My maternal grandfather was a
mohel.
A what?
A mohel. The Jewish doctor who performs the bris milah.
give him a second to guess, then explain, 
Circumcision. I think he
must have bagged himself about a thousand foreskins.
My nose wrinkle was nothing compared to his openmouthed
horror.
I gather my notebook, papers, pen, and empty paper cup. I cross
the threshold when Ben calls, 
Goldberg.
Yes?
Give me a sec to get my things and I will escort you.
It is late and the building is deserted. Our security guard left
hours ago. 
Okay,
 I agree. 
Just let me fetch my briefcase.
Ben is waiting at the elevator when I emerge from my office
with my briefcase, which contains the Gentry papers. I should not
stay up to read them but I doubt I will be able to resist. My first
cross-examination of a capital murder trial witness. I want to know
as much as I can, now.
Inside the elevator I say, 
I met him once.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Ben frowns and the wrinkle appears in his forehead. 
Who?
Dominic Brown.
 I lean my back against the rear wall and sigh.
In the Piggly Wiggly. He was pocketing some bubble gum. I assumed he was trying to shoplift but he told his mother he was practicing his magic trick.
The elevator shudders, then stops, and after a half-minute, opens
its door with a shriek of grinding metal. Ben winces.
I was working out his sentence, assuming he was a thief. I had
a lot of thefts that week.
t say anything you wouldn
t repeat in court,
 he says, opening the front door for me. 
Could you prove it was theft?
My car looks smaller in the dark, a hunched metal turtle. 
Then let
s assume it was a magic trick.
 His gaze is directed up,
above the streetlights toward the three-quarter moon.
Yes, let
 I say. My chest loosens, and I realize that since I
recognized his face in those crime scene photos, I have wanted to
believe in magic. Why sully a dead child
s name?
Ben walks me to my car door. In the moonlight he looks, for the
very first time, like a man who has battled cancer.
Good night, Ben,
 I say.
He waves at me after I close my door and then shuffles off to
his own car parked a hundred feet away. I cannot see it from here,
but affixed to the back of his sedan is a sticker that reads, 
Kennedy
s car has killed more people than my gun.
 He is a funny
guy, that Ben.
Chapter Twenty
August 29, 2000
There is a fly somewhere in the courtroom. I try to ignore the insect
s buzzing and concentrate on the group sitting in the jury box,
waiting. Day one of voir dire, jury selection, for State of Georgia v.
Washington. I look past the shoulder of potential juror number one,
at a white water stain caused by a plumbing leak in the early nineties. Before my time, but the stain is familiar. I
ve stared at it often
enough.
We lucked out, getting to play on our home court. The defense
could have pushed for a change of venue, during the appeals hearing, but Ben said Landry omitted it from his eight-page list of points
for redress. The gamble would have been successful with heavy press
coverage of the murders, but publicity about the crimes and victims
has been sparse. It seems people are less intrigued by school shootings if the shooters were not students themselves. The nation
s focus
is on Columbine and the mini-Columbines that followed, one in
Savannah in March.
The assembled jurors look about the courtroom, many of them
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
seeing it from this vantage point for the first time. Does it add to
the symbol of power, this elevation? Or are they hoping to answer
a question wrong, so that they can drive away from the courthouse
and the trial and the prospect of judging another person
s right to
live? Ben waits beside me in silence. That damned fly is still buzzing
about.
Judge Herbert Pullman sits in the most elevated seat, scowling
down at all below him with flint-colored eyes. He is not angry. That
scowl is his default expression. I saw him smile once and the stretching of those thin lips to reveal pale pink gums and crooked teeth is
among the top ten scariest things I have ever seen. Judge Pullman is
reputed to be fair, a moderate in a judicial pool full of extremists. His
scowl deepens before he clears his throat and addresses the jury box.
Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the Bibb County courthouse. Some of you may be new to the process of jury selection,
and for those of you who are not, I would recommend you pay
strict attention since this case is a little different from others you
may have served on. The case you are being considered for as jurors,
State v. Washington, is a capital case, meaning that the defendant
faces the death penalty if found guilty of the crimes he is to stand
trial for.
 He leans forward, encompassing all the jurors in his unblinking gaze. They stare, obedient schoolchildren, ready to digest
their lesson.
Now you remember those juror questionnaires you filled out?
Well, the district attorney
Judge Pullman nods to Ben and me
and the defense
a head bob in Thomas Landry
s direction
going to ask you some questions based on your answers, and some
new questions. So please answer honestly. If, after this, you are
asked to leave, you are excused from jury duty and we thank you for
your time. It is not a reflection on your character.
 I repress a smile.
Judge Pullman
character
 is a mountainous adjective that slopes
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
up and down and up again. First syllable up, second syllable down,
third syllable up.
The district attorney
s office will begin.
 He nods again to Ben,
who rises from his chair, pushing it back with a loud screech that
startles the people in the jury box, awakening them from their torpor. Assessing their alert faces, I wonder if he scraped the chair on
purpose.
He coughs, eyes the assembled group, and smiles. The smile
reminds one of a kind uncle. It is cheerful and inviting and says,
Hey, we
re pals, right?
 I have seen its effect on others, witnessed
the relaxed shoulders and returned smiles it causes, never having
experienced that smile myself. No, for me it is always the middleof-the-eyes frown.
Ben says, 
First, let me thank you for coming this morning. We
appreciate your willingness to serve as jurors. It is an important duty,
and a grave responsibility. And one hell of an inconvenience when
you have a pile of work to complete or children who need minding,
am I right?
 The people laugh and nod. I expect the judge to call
Ben out for his expenditure of time making friends, but he doesn
Now, I
ll begin by asking each of you some questions. Mr.
Dillard?
The man in the back row, wearing a red and blue plaid shirt,
looks up as if startled to hear his name. 
Yes, sir?
Now, Mr. Dillard, you
re still a resident of Payne?
Yes, sir.
I scribble 
respectful
 next to his name. My job today: psychological profiler. I have to study each juror, mark their habits, responses, and any impressions I have. We will use this information
when we make our strikes, dismissing those jurors without cause we
do not want. We have ten strikes. The defense has twenty. It is supposed to level the playing field. We go first.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
And you work at Grainger?
Mr. Dillard nods. 
Yes, sir. I am a salesperson for Grainger.
And you
ve been there how long?
Four years. Before that I worked for Seelig Furniture, before
they went out of business.
Ben nods, as if he is familiar with the business of layoffs. 
Dillard, you have two children?
A parent could be good for us. No one wants to see a little boy
corpse, but a parent might want to see it even less and want retribution even more. 
Yes, sir. A boy and a girl, Kevin and Leila. Kevin
thirteen and Leila
s ten.
Dillard doesn
t look old enough to have a thirteen-year-old son.
His weak chin looks as though it never needs shaving.
Do they attend school in Payne?
No, they live with their mother in Macon.
 Mr. Dillard clears
his throat. His eyes shift toward the judge and then back to Ben.
re getting divorced.
I see. I am sorry to hear that.
 He is, I know. Because now Mr.
Dillard isn
t our upstanding respectable father of two, he is a man
facing a life change, a future divorced dad. I put an X beside his
name and write 
divorce.
 A man with the breakup of his home on
his mind is not the best candidate for a murder trial.
Mr. Dillard, you realize that if convicted, the defendant could
face the death penalty, and as a juror in our state, you would be
responsible for prescribing that sentence. Now, I am not saying you
will have to, but I have to ask, Mr. Dillard, would you be able to?
Could you sentence a man to death?
If there were no other options?
 I write another X next to Mr.
Dillard
s name and add 
death penalty opposed.
If I had to, yes,
I suppose I could.
Everyone will be asked this. If anyone says no, that person is
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
excused. The ability to say yes, I can sentence someone to death, is
called 
death qualified.
 Funny to think I would not qualify. Funnier still, considering where I am sitting.
Thank you, Mr. Dillard.
 Ben turns a fraction, so I may see his
raised brows. I nod to indicate that I get it, that Mr. Dillard is out.
Mrs. Clemens, how are you today?
 Ben moves on to the next
juror, a middle-aged black woman wearing a small gold cross. That
cross could be good or bad, depending on her religious position.
There are the merciful Christians who believe in the redemptive
powers of establishing a relationship with their savior, Jesus Christ.
These will not allow a lethal cocktail of pharmaceuticals to be injected into someone. Then there are the vengeful Christians who
spout scriptures with messages of justice and vengeance. They will
not hesitate to send another human to a final reckoning with God.
The trouble lies in distinguishing between the two. When we spoke
last week, over paper cups filled with coffee, Ben warned me that
this distinguishing is not as easy as it appears. I wanted to say, 
think it
s easy? Any of it?
 I held it in.
Mrs. Clemens is fifty-two, married, and stays at home. She has
an infant granddaughter named Eileen. Mrs. Clemens sings in the
choir at her church, the First Baptist, on High Street. Not the First
Baptist on New Street. I make a note of it. Maybe it will mean
something to Ben. All it means to me is that Macon possesses more
churches than gas stations, and that it needs to rethink its naming
system. After all, you can only have one first anything.
Ben slides his eyes toward me. I stare back, my face set, body
upright and a little stiff. I never should have quit ballet. It would
have improved my courtroom posture. I jot a note down beside
Mrs. Clemens
s name. Actually it isn
t a note. It
s a doodle of a star.
It doesn
t mean anything. I am drawing so Ben will stop looking at
me like a suspicious teacher checking on a recalcitrant pupil.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Mrs. Clemens, do you believe a child who was abused may be
more likely to commit crimes?
Yes, I suppose I do.
And would you consider that history of abuse to explain criminal behavior? For example, would you favor leniency toward a defendant that had been abused as a child?
Well, now, I don
t know.
 I watch Ben watch Mrs. Clemens.
There are plenty of abused children in this world. Too many, I fear,
but not all of them grow up to be criminals. So it doesn
t seem right
to say that
s why they done what they done, does it?
I scribble a 
 next to 
mitigating circumstances: abuse.
 Yes
means she is on our side. Mrs. Clemens looks good, or, by contrast,
she doesn
t look bad. 
They should call it jury deselection,
 Ben whispered to me in the hallway before we entered the courtroom. 
Since
s more about getting rid of the ones you don
t like.
s next questions concern whether she has any relationship to
the defendant or victims. Mrs. Clemens admits she once attended
a wedding at which Mr. Brown, Dominic
s father, presided. Ben
smiles; his entire face radiates goodwill for her honesty. When I give
him honesty I never get a smile. My pen moves to make a mark
beside Mrs. Clemens
s name to indicate that we like her, but then
I see I did so when I was doodling. She has a star beside her name.
Huh. Maybe I should tell Ben I am able to divine our best jurors
through doodling.
Ben thanks her and moves on to Mr. Gusswater, an out-of-work
electrician from Macon. I tear my eyes from Mr. Gusswater
s Adam
apple, which jumps up and down with every word spoken.
I look left, where defense attorney Mr. Thomas Landry, son of
the almost Supreme Court contender, sits. His dark hair is slicked
so it looks a bit like that of a Ken doll, plastic and stiff. That
s where
the resemblance to Ken ends. Thomas Landry is five shades darker
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
than Ken and wears glasses that are only lacking a piece of the tape
in the middle for geek authenticity. His bow tie, red, contrasts with
the white dress shirt and navy blue suit.
I can impose a death penalty,
 Mr. Gusswater says. He sounds
like he is ready to pull the switch now. A star goes beside his name.
An ideal juror for us, and a person I cannot respect.
I sneak another look at Landry. He is making notes of his own,
though he has an aide beside him, some ruddy-cheeked lawyer who
looks as though the ink on his degree is still wet. I didn
t catch his
name in the hallway when Landry stopped to introduce himself this
morning.
Miss Goldberg,
 he had half shouted. I turned at the unexpected summons. 
How do you do? I am Thomas Landry.
 His
voice was his best feature: a strong baritone that seemed too big for
his body. He had civil engineer written all over him, and it wasn
just the eyeglasses.
I have been a longtime admirer of your father
s work,
 he said,
setting his briefcase beside his leg. I noticed the laces on his black
wingtips were loose. 
Except for the Hallihan case. Didn
t care for
that one.
No shock there. Jeff Hallihan was a New England dairy farmer
who argued for the segregation of Boy Scout troops. He figured
since they could exclude gays, why not blacks? My father represented his case against the New Hampshire town where he lived,
which had invoked a restraining order against Mr. Hallihan prohibiting him from getting closer than five hundred yards to any public
school, town hall building, or public meeting space. He argued that
the town
s lockdown violated Mr. Hallihan
s freedom of expression
and his right to engage in free speech. He also showed that Mr.
Hallihan
s home had been searched without a warrant. He won the
case.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
A lot of people didn
t care for my father
s representation of
Hallihan. A lot of people didn
t care for his representation of Gillison, either.
 If Landry was a fan, he would know that Gillison was
the leader of a black protest group in the late 1970s who bombed
a veterans
 club outside Boston. My father defended him against
charges of conspiracy and arson. He won the case, and proved, in
the process, that several members of the police had tampered with
and planted evidence. During the trial my mother and I stayed with
friends in New York, on what I believed was a minivacation. My
father wanted us safe from retaliatory measures. It wasn
t until years
later that I made the connection between the court decision and the
date of our surprise summer trip.
I launched some retaliation of my own at Landry. 
And I suppose a lot of people don
t care for your representation of your client.
 I shrugged. 
Nice meeting you.
Thank you, Mr. Gusswater,
 Ben says in the voice parents use
for their Little Leaguer sons. He is a go for us, although Landry will
use a strike to remove him. There is no way he will keep a guy who
sounds like the death penalty
s number one fan.
Ben strolls before the jury box, asking questions, then stepping
back to rest his hand against our table. He seems relaxed, at ease,
as if he is chatting with friends in his living room. This persona,
this appeal, is powerful. I almost fall victim to it myself. I place an
X beside Lisa Kelsey
s name. She mentions a brother in prison and
appears reluctant to enforce the death penalty. She shifts in her seat
as though it is too hot, though the temperature in the courtroom
is, for once, mild.
Judge Pullman
s gavel raps against wood twice after Miss Kelsey
finishes. He announces a recess for lunch. My stomach awakens to
these magic words, and a low gastric rumble rolls through me. Or
maybe it is the anxiety of tallying people on a sheet that is gnawing
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
at my stomach lining. Either way, I am happy for the opportunity
to move my legs.
Ben and I eat across the street at the Between the Bread Cafe. He
orders a roast beef sandwich, fries, and a milkshake. I have a chicken
salad. He looks at my mixture of greens, veggies, and breast meat
and says, 
How can you survive on that?
I stare at his plate full of food, dripping grease and ask, 
How are
you going to stay awake this afternoon?
 Has he never experienced
an afternoon food coma?
What do you think so far?
 he asks, after eating half his sandwich in three bites.
Clemens and Gusswater seem good, but there is no way Landry
will let Gusswater stay.
He wipes at the corner of his mouth with a paper napkin. 
if he has any brains.
Thought Landry was smart.
 My soda slurps through my straw.
I look about to make sure no one has noticed. The other patrons
are busy giving their orders to waitresses who wear pencils tucked
behind their ears.
Smart enough. What were you two talking about this morning?
 He has finished his sandwich. His thick fingers scoop up multiple French fries and deposit them into his mouth.
He introduced himself, said he was a fan of my father
s work.
He wasn
t asking any questions about the case?
Why, Ben, are you protecting my legal virtue?
 I infuse my
question with as much saccharine as possible.
He grunts.
I am capable of fending for myself,
 I tell him, checking the
wall clock. We have fifteen minutes left.
Just be careful,
 he warns. I repress a snort. Does he think
Landry can fish information out of me? I could give him testimoni159
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
als from several defense attorneys who will vouch that I keep my
legal tricks hidden very far up my sleeves.
s head back,
 he says, tossing money onto the tabletop. He
waves aside my hand as I reach for my purse. 
I will pay.
 He and
I have always brought our own food to lunches so I am unsure
whether this is collegial courtesy or Southern breeding.
Thanks,
 I tell him before scooping up his last French fry. I
pop it into my mouth and enjoy his crestfallen expression, as if that
French fry was all that was standing between him and starvation.
Told you I can fend for myself.
 I wind my way through the
maze of metal chairs, toward the exit. Across the street, in the court,
Justice waits for us to pick our teams.
Chapter Twenty-one
So what
s this, date number seven?
Eight,
 Lacey corrects.
Lacey
s got a boyfriend,
 I singsong. 
Lacey and Todd, sitting
in a tree, k-i-s-s-i-n-g.
Stop it, you
re embarrassing yourself,
 she scolds. 
Good God,
you sound like me.
I smile because she is right. 
s taking you to see The Lion King?
Yeah, he knows the director through the foundation somehow.
I couldn
t believe it when he said he got tickets.
My smile lingers as I wonder how Lacey, who has issues about
suspension of disbelief in musicals, is going to handle a theatrical
performance about singing and dancing animals. I decide against
asking.
So when are you coming to visit me and meet my beau?
I am startled by the question and the anger behind it. 
I don
know. I have this capital case. Maybe after that. I can
t predict when
it will end.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
You know I can work around your schedule. Just come. Say
ll come.
I almost ask why doesn
t she come to me, but swallow the childish response. Todd is not in Macon and Lacey may feel awkward
inviting him to Georgia to meet me, as if he must pass inspection.
ll come.
Really?
 Her squeal of excitement makes my ear hairs vibrate.
Yes. Really.
Lacey talks of all the things we will do when I come: eat real
bagels, visit the penguins at the Central Park Zoo, drink hot
chocolate at Serendipity, and visit her new favorite clothing store
in SoHo. As she catalogues our time together I see it before me:
the metal spires of the Chrysler Building shining silver-gold in
the sun. There will be yellow cabs crowding the streets, and the
fragrant steamy smell of pretzels and hot dogs, with undertones
of ketchup and pigeon urine. My house collapses about me to a
third of its size and I stand within the eleventh-floor apartment I
once rented for too much money. Henry James barks next door.
Yes, yes, it
s all there, behind my eyes and inside my stomach and
under my callused heels.
I promise Lacey again that I will visit and leave her to plan an
itinerary, knowing she will be distracted by another task within forty-five minutes. Not me, with my daily planner and self-adhesive
notes stuck to the refrigerator reminding me to pick up dry cleaning.
Lacey
s system is fluid. She makes stuff up as she goes along. I have
always liked that about her, though it baffles me. How can anyone
live without knowing where she stored last year
s tax returns?
I think forward, to seeing Lacey and returning to New York. Unlike Lacey, I never took to Manhattan. I didn
t love it, not the way
real New Yorkers do. I didn
t worship at the temple of the Yankees
or get fired up by local politics or care what constituted the next
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
new 
 thing. I rarely took advantage of the city
s entertainments
and I often felt suffocated by the swarms of people around me:
on the trains, in restaurants, and at museums. The city shone too
bright and blared too loud.
I never planned to live in New York forever. But to leave the way
I did made me sad to go. The differences between it and Macon,
so pronounced as to be tragicomic, only made me miss New York
more than I might have had I ended up somewhere less unlike it.
I sigh and head to the kitchen where my dirty dishes await. One
plate, a fork, a knife, and a glass. It does not seem worth opening the
dishwasher door and arranging the items within the slots of plastic
spikes. I turn on the tap and squeeze a yellow stream of dish soap
into the metal sink, remembering how I used to complain about my
lack of a dishwasher in New York.
Maybe I am never satisfied with what I have. Dishwasher/love/
job/family. I hum under my breath, unaware of the song until I
recognize the tune. 
Satisfaction.
 I wipe the face of the plate with
the dishrag, wide circles to little circles.
A sharp metallic chirp trills, and I nearly lose my grip on the
plate. I steady it and settle it into the drying rack. The metallic chirp
continues to berate me. I miss the phones of my youth, which rang
in pure bell tones and sounded more like a wedding and less like a
verbal harangue.
I rub the hot soapsuds off my hands with a dish towel. The
phone
s plastic feels cold. 
Hello?
Natalie?
 The low voice, once described as 
sonorous
 by a reporter writing for The New Yorker, startles me because it is the last
voice I expect to hear.
Dad?
 It is absurd to ask, just as it was absurd for him to end
my name with a question mark, as if we have forgotten what the
other sounds like. As if we could. 
Why are you calling? Is every163
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
thing okay?
 I picture my mother semireclined and unconscious on
a hospital bed.
Everything
s fine. Nothing is the matter.
 It is the same thing he
used to tell me when I protested that no, there really were monsters
under my bed and inside my closet. 
I just called to see how you
were doing. We haven
t talked in a while.
No kidding. 
m fine. Good. Busy. You?
Things at the office are quiet now. Next month we have two big
cases concerning student confidentiality.
What kind of students?
Elementary school, high school, the ones too young to dispute
having to submit to laws they cannot affect since they cannot vote.
I know this speech well, having heard it many times. It once incited
me to argue with the manager of a local CVS about the sales tax on
a package of barrettes. Taxation without representation, I argued,
was unfair. At thirteen I couldn
t vote, but I was expected to pay
taxes on everything from nail polish to restaurant pizza. The drugstore manager waived the tax, because he was tired of hearing me
talk and I was holding up the line.
Massachusetts?
 I ask, referring to the venue where his cases
will be heard.
Vermont.
Good luck.
Thanks.
 He clears his throat. 
I read about your upcoming
case in the paper.
Which one?
 Stupid question. It must be the Washington
trial.
The capital case. It was in The Boston Globe, a footnote on the
national news. You were listed as the prosecution.
Is he asking if it is true? Does he distrust the fact-checkers at
the Globe or the Associated Press? 
Jury selection began today.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
rub the back of my neck, which feels like a rubber band stretched
too far.
How did it go?
Okay, I guess. Hard to tell. Juries are a crapshoot.
 Oy vey, I
have just quoted Ben. 
We hope to finish by tomorrow.
Nervous?
Oh. That question. My waist encircled by a pink tulle tutu, my
hair pulled back, inside Miss Juliet
s School of Dance. My pinkslippered feet reluctant to step forward onto the stage. 
Nervous?
my dad asked, bending so that he could look into my eyes and see
the fear himself. I loved the tutus, hair ribbons, and leotards but I
did not love the recitals when everyone would watch me twirl and
hop out of time with the other girls whose feet seemed surer, better
placed than mine.
Yes,
 I admit, just as I did then. 
But I
m second-chairing. My
colleague, Ben Maddox, will do most of the trial presentation.
Do you know the defense?
Not really. His name is Thomas Landry. He says he admires
your work, except for the Hallihan case. He didn
t care for that
one.
You wouldn
t think being a lawyer would have much in common with being a Broadway actor,
 he says. 
But sometimes it feels
that way, when people critique your performance as if it were a
role. 
I loved you in Walker v. Raymond but hated you in Mclellan
v. Dresner.
 His falsetto mocks someone but I don
t know whom.
The tightness of his voice surprises me. He never seemed bothered
by the accusations of publicity-seeking or the description of him as
a bloodhound on the scent of tomorrow
s liberal cause. He used to
laugh at the newspaper articles and unflattering mail.
My cocounsel, Ben, knows the defense, or defense counsel
family, and in Georgia it
s all about 
your people.
 I draw out the
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
phrase in my best mock Southern accent, which isn
t very good. My
throat clips the long vowels short.
He does not respond to this. 
I spoke to George Millner the
other day. He was telling me that GLAAD is looking for another
staff attorney. They are doing some interesting work on same-sex
marriage cases in Massachusetts.
That
s great.
 I like George Millner. He lived across the street
and consulted with my dad years ago. He often brought me stickers
or candy when he stopped by. A man with two daughters, he knew
how to bribe a little girl. 
How is he doing? Didn
t his younger
daughter, Julia, get married recently?
s doing well. Yes, Julia did get married, to an eye surgeon at
Mass Eye and Ear. David something or other.
 I smile. My father
cannot remember people
s names unless he repeats them to himself
like a mantra just after meeting them. 
He asked about you and
how you were doing.
I hope you told him I
m well.
 The words eject themselves like
bullets, harsher than I had intended. I rub my forehead with the
heel of my hand.
I told him about your work. He couldn
t believe you were in
Macon, or at the DA
s office. I think he might have had you in mind
when he told me about the GLAAD position.
I sit at the kitchen table and stop a sigh. It tickles. 
I don
t want
to work for GLAAD.
Why not? They do terrific work. Your mother would love to
have you close again.
 I lean harder into the tabletop.
Dad, do you remember when I took ballet?
 I close my eyes and
I am seven years old again and graceful as a three-legged buffalo.
Yes. You were a beautiful sugarplum fairy.
 He is remembering
the photo of me on the mantel. He may be looking at it now.
But I hated ballet. I liked the outfits and some of the mu166
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
sic. I did not like the classes or the teacher and I loathed recitals,
remember?
He chuckles. 
You tried to convince your mother that you
couldn
t perform in the Winter Festival because you had chicken
pox. You drew spots all over yourself with a blue Magic Marker.
I couldn
t find the red one,
 I protest, still anxious to make sure
that it is understood that I intended to draw red spots, not blue
ones. 
But Dad, remember how I thought I would hate summer
camp in Maine?
You cried every day for a week before you left. We almost didn
send you. Your poor mother sobbed her heart out on the drive home
after we dropped you off.
But I loved it. Remember?
How could I forget? You didn
t want to leave. You had made
so many friends and you even learned to fish.
 Me, the poster child
for not getting dirty, had baited a hook and caught a fish. I made
my camp counselor remove the fish from the line for me, though,
certain the fish would try to exact vengeance.
Well, life is like that. Sometimes the things you always wanted
turn out to be less than you had hoped, and the things you dreaded
become wonderful.
 I stare at the kitchen around me, at my collection of teacups, at my refrigerator sporting pastel sticky notes with
to-do lists. 
I am good at my job. I am helping people. Not the way
I planned to, but I am still helping.
 Who am I trying to convince:
him or me?
But honey, you haven
t even tried. You are so young. You only had
the other job in New York, and I know that is not what you wanted.
But now, you can do anything. You don
t have to stay down there.
I think I might.
Natalie, you have been down there over a year now. You beat
them at their game.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
My scalp tingles. 
What do you mean?
Nattie, you showed them what you are made of. You don
t have
to do it anymore. You won.
 I won? Won what?
He sighs, the same long exhalation he would make before telling
me I had to eat my carrots or that I couldn
t play outside after dinner. It is his patented 
why must you make me say it
 sigh. 
Staying
down there won
t change anything. What is done is done. I think
you have suffered enough. You can stop punishing yourself.
I stare before me at the small dish towel hanging from the handle of the oven. There is a tomato-sauce stain by the lower right
corner.
He knows about Henry and the partners. I told him. It burst
out of me during an argument over my plan to go to Macon. Judge
Owens had spoken to him, given wind of my plan, before I had
shared it. Dad called wanting to know why I had asked the judge
to recommend me for a job in the South, and when I planned on
telling him. He pointed out that my criminal law experience was
limited at best.
I need this job,
 I had told him.
A public prosecutor? In Georgia? Was I aware it was a death
penalty state? Did I have any idea what the low salary would be? He
threw questions at me like baseballs, hard, unrelenting.
Dad, I slept with a partner at the firm. He accused me of screwing up an account, a major account. The partners wanted to demote
me. I couldn
t stay.
He was silent for so long I began to worry. When he spoke he said,
They cannot fire you. That is discrimination for a consensual act.
I wanted him to say, 
Which partner? I will kill him.
 I wanted
him to be my father, not a lawyer. His calm acceptance of my behavior disturbed me. I expected him to be shocked. I wanted him to be.
Didn
t he think better of me?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Nattie? Are you there?
 he says now.
I swallow and nod, although he cannot see me. 
m here,
whisper.
Nattie, think about George
s offer. I know he would be glad to
have you. He always wished one of his girls wanted to follow in his
footsteps. He used to tell me how he envied me you.
I nod again. 
Okay,
 I say because I cannot say more.
Do you want to talk to your mother?
 He offers her like a
bandage, something to stop the bleeding. But I do not want her,
not now.
No. Tell her I love her. I will talk to her soon. I . . . I need to go
to bed. It
s a big day tomorrow.
Okay, you take care now. Sweet dreams.
He ends the call with this invocation, as if he can summon visions of sugarplums and assign them to my bedside. I put the phone
down and lean my chin onto hands splayed flat on the table.
I try to remember drawing those blue spots on my body with
the marker. Did I only cover the areas exposed by my clothes or was
I more thorough in my deceit? I do recall how flat and square the
navy spots looked. I wasn
t fooling anyone.
I shuffle to the bathroom, aware that it is the nights I need sleep
most that I often find it hardest to obtain.
As I splash tepid water onto my face, I remember hearing my
mother tell my father how I had tried to trick her with the marker. I
had snuck down the hall to listen to them talking in the kitchen. My
mother recounted how she found me with the uncapped marker and
the family medical guide displaying chicken pox, how my body was
covered in navy spots. She told him I had pled the Fifth Amendment
when asked what I was doing. He had laughed, long and loud. When
he recovered breath to speak he said, 
That
s my girl.
She most certainly is,
 said my mother. 
She is all yours.
Chapter Twenty-two
September 5, 2000
ll reconvene tomorrow at eight o
clock.
 Judge Pullman bangs
his gavel twice and stands. His black robe flutters behind him as
he escapes through the door set into the back wall. The bailiff announces that all should rise, and the jury members stir slowly, as if
awakening from a decade-long slumber. Glazed eyes and stiff bodies
turn toward the bailiff assigned to shepherd them from the room, to
keep them safe from any press and outside influence. They follow in
his wake like baby chicks behind their mother hen.
I reach for my satchel and grunt underneath my breath as I bend
over. My feet hurt. They shouldn
t, since I have been sitting all day.
I must have been clenching my toes inside my too-tight pumps.
Nerves. The first day of my first capital murder trial.
Ben stands, waiting for me, his right hand resting on the top of
his briefcase. Landry sits at his table, staring ahead to where Judge
Pullman sat a minute earlier. I wonder how he thought it went.
A few journalists have gathered on the courthouse steps looking
to catch a five-second sound bite. Ben gives them a few hearty reas-
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
surances that we
re going to win and remove the scourge that is Calvin Washington from the streets of Georgia so its citizens can sleep
safely at night. My effort to blend into the steps meets with success.
No reporters thrust their bulbous microphones into my face like
feedbags to a horse. When Landry appears the microphones migrate
and Ben and I make our way, unimpeded, to the street. We don
look back to watch Landry make his own vows to the public.
We head to the office. Ben
s pace is slower than my own, but
given his age, weight, medical condition, and Southern upbringing,
this presents little surprise. Two blocks into our journey finds me
wishing I had a pair of flip-flops hidden in my satchel.
Halfway to the office Ben says, 
Landry
s opening was solid.
I grunt, too tired to speak. Landry spoke of his client
s innocence, harping on the lack of the murder weapon and the police
department
s failure to pursue other suspects. He added comments
about his client
s poor upbringing: his learning disability (dyslexia),
his broken home (father left when Calvin was four), and his abuse at
the hands of his violent stepfather and subsequent foster parents. A
few jurors shot curious looks at Calvin
s dark, impassive face. I spotted more than one juror
s face wrinkling with thought as Landry
hinted that this prosecution was just another in a series of fate
cruel tricks against Calvin Washington.
The dark brick of our building appears. I ignore the screaming
lines of pain radiating from my toes to my heels. 
You were better,
I say.
Ben slows his gait, which is somewhat tilted to one side and
rolling, as if he is standing on a ship. He tilts his head toward me.
What
s that?
 I can
t tell if he genuinely misheard me, lost in courtroom abstractions, or if he is merely making me repeat myself.
I said your opening was better.
 Just half a block now and we
will be inside. I have a pair of soft, slip-on mules in my closet.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Why do you say that?
I grimace. Clearly he wants all I will give. 
You laid it all out
easy-peasy. You didn
t lose one of them. They hung on your every
word, and they stared at Washington as if checking him for horns.
You had them questioning everything Landry had told them.
Ben smiles. 
He sure did have them leaning forward when he
described the gun
s absence, though,
 he points out.
s a murder trial, not a game of lost and found. Just because
we didn
t find the gun doesn
t mean we lose.
 I hope the jury realizes this.
I hobble toward the building, salvation within sight. Ben holds
the door for me, and I stumble past George who greets us with
good evening.
 We wait before the elevator bank, and, though
I hate the moving box of imminent death, I do not for a minute
consider taking the stairs.
Wilkins did well on the stand,
 Ben muses. The elevator announces its approach with a squeal of metal and the smell of burning rubber. 
Better than Cox might have done.
The metal jaws open. Ben follows me inside. The doors close
with cinematic slowness. I keep my gaze trained on the buttons and
try to concentrate on the image of the navy blue slip-ons waiting
for me on my closet floor. Ben hums under his breath. I almost
stumble and trip when the doors creak open, for I realize he is humming a Frank Sinatra song, 
Chicago.
 It is one of Lala
s flower song
standards.
I hurry to my office and the promise of podiatric relief. Ben
hand on my arm halts my forward progress. 
What?
 I ask, in a tone
that demands a good explanation.
He favors me with a cool glance. The sort he shot toward Landry
all day long. 
The case is moving forward quickly, despite all of
Landry
s objections. We may rest as early as Thursday. You ready to
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
cross Mr. Gentry?
 His soft brown eyes examine me. I straighten my
shoulders and stand taller.
I hope so.
 Damn. That is not what I meant to say. I meant to
say yes, absolutely, no doubt, I am ready.
I hope so, too.
 He moves his briefcase from his left hand to his
right. 
See you tomorrow morning. Seven-thirty.
I nod. Then I hurry past everyone in the hall, keeping my head
low so I won
t have to stop and talk. The few people still about do
not interrupt me, aware that I
ve been in court all day trying a capital case. It
s a bit like being a pitcher with a no-hitter game going,
or so Carl has explained. Some weird baseball voodoo superstition
thing. I offer silent thanks to its law equivalent.
I drop my satchel beside my desk and walk to the closet, flinging
the door against the wall in my enthusiasm. I bend down, look inside, and blink hard. Leaning forward and twisting my torso, I peer
into dusty corners where no shoes could possibly hide. I stand and
rise to search the shelf where boxes of office supplies are organized
by function, shape, and color.
My right palm smacks my forehead when memory returns. I
wore the shoes home last week, after a late-night prep session with
Ben. I am enraged for a moment with the me of a week ago. My
feet did not hurt that night, not like now. Now I could weep from
the throbbing in my toes. I step out of the shoes and slowly flex
them, wincing as the movement increases and releases the tension.
Ow, ow, ow.
I look about the room and decide my e-mail and phone messages can wait. I step back into the prison of my shoes and cross the
room for my briefcase. The dark green and wood of the room are
too much now. I crave the soft colors of my home.
A rectangle of light illuminates the carpet before Ben
s open office door. He is still inside, working. He should go home. No unex174
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
pected developments require he remain, and he could use the rest.
The pouches under his eyes have sagged to new depths. I consider
sticking my head into his office and telling him to go, but that
might only make him stay later. He is as bad as I am that way.
He was good in court today, really good, assertive and convincing, but engaging and seemingly kind. He didn
t deny Landry
s statements that his client had suffered at the hands of the foster home system or juvenile courts. He did not do what many prosecutors would
have done: demand that the handcuffed man in the courtroom be
considered a monster. He did something much smarter. He admitted Calvin Washington was human, and he played on this notion of
humanity, of frailty, passion, violence, and its consequences until he
had the jury believing that humans are hazardous creatures and the
removal of the most dangerous was necessary to the preservation of
society. An old-new notion expounded by philosophers from Plato
to Kant. But Ben managed to incorporate this idea and encapsulate
it so that it could be swallowed, without water, by a box of twelve
critics. Hardest of all, he managed to do this on his feet. I heard bits
of his prepared opening, and, with the exception of the names of the
victims and the defendant, it was wholly different. The first version
contained lots of 
cold-blooded
 and 
inhuman
 references. Within
the time it took for him to listen to Landry
s pathos-heavy opening,
he revised his entire speech. He toned down the anger and belligerence and made it more effective for its lack of huff and puff.
As I slide into my car seat and close the door with a soft thud I
realize that I have spent the past five minutes engaged in admiring
the courtroom skills of one Mr. Benjamin Maddox. So enraptured
by the memory of his devastating put-down of Landry as his 
softhearted colleague, corrupted by the idea of corruption, enslaved by
the notion of conspiracy theories,
 I managed to forget my elevator
fear.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Cool night air sweeps through the window and ruffles the collar of my shirt. Soon it will be my turn to stand in the courtroom,
to cross-examine Abraham Gentry, the witness who claims to have
seen Calvin Washington at a gas station in Columbus near the estimated time of the murders. It seems unlikely Calvin Washington
could have killed two people and have been spotted in Columbus
forty-five minutes later. It will be my job to make sure the jury is left
with no doubts, reasonable or otherwise, as to the veracity of Mr.
Gentry
s story. My stomach clenches. I can
t screw up. I won
On my street, the houses glow, lit from within, like jack-o
-lanterns. The Gessler twins
 toppled bicycles lie on their front lawn,
fallen to their sides. I imagine the children hopping off their bikes
and letting them fall where they may as they race each other inside.
I think of Sarah
s children, Billy and Lily. Are they riding bikes at
their great-aunt
s house? Have they stopped asking when Daddy
will come?
No lights shine from my white box house. The yellow shutters
look like dark wings attached to the bodies of the windows in the
evening dark. The gutter is hanging too low on the right side. I
ought to have it repaired.
I kick the shoes off my feet as soon as I am inside. The right one
misses the hall lamp by centimeters. I pick up my slippers at the
side of the bed, where I stepped out of them and into my horrible
shoes this morning. The slippers laugh at me, pink and fluffy, with
tiny bunny ears poking up and out. A purchase inspired by whimsy.
They seemed so silly, so impractical, so very unlike me.
I slip-slap my way into the kitchen and peer into my freezer.
I need a prepackaged meal option that will require five minutes
or less in the microwave. Frozen chicken curry. Perfect. Now for a
drink. Wine. Red? I bend to root through my wine cage. It holds a
maximum of sixteen bottles. Now it contains only three. My nose
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
wrinkles. Weren
t there five bottles the other day? And where did the
Australian Shiraz go? I grab the lowermost bottle, a Riesling, and
settle it atop the table, banishing thoughts of alcoholism for now.
I consume a too-soft chicken piece that dissolves like aspirin in
my mouth. I chase it with the Riesling, which is not the best I
ever had, or even a close fourth. Where did the damn Shiraz go?
I finish my second glass of wine, dutiful in taking my medicine.
It helps me sleep, and lately I need my sleep. Sometimes when I
close my eyes and press my fingertips against my lids I see starbursts,
flashes of white against a dark background. One day in November,
I sat at my desk, head in my hands. I touched my fingertips to my
closed lids and I didn
t see starbursts. I saw a mutilated woman.
Her face swollen with bruises, her temple dark with blood. Her hair
twisted behind her as if trying to escape. The worst of it was that she
was alive, unconscious, but alive.
The photo sat atop Carl
s desk, in a folder. He saw me look at
it as I approached to ask him a question. He closed the folder and
apologized. Carl is careful not to expose outsiders to the brutality
of his work. Back then, still awaiting the results of my Georgia bar
exam, I was very much an outsider. But the flash of that woman inside my skull brought me one step closer to the legions of attorneys
who sleep too little and drink too much, who talk about sports or
cars or politics because talking about justice is impossible.
The woman behind my eyelids appeared once. Yet how easily
might a fellow victim of violence appear when my eyes are closed?
Each day the number of casualties increases. I don
t know what
scares me more: that I will see them behind my lids, or that I will
grow so used to them that, even behind my pupils, they cannot
shock me?
I close the dishwasher and head for the bathroom. I try not to
stare at the blue shadows underneath my eyes, or the zit near my
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
hairline. The toothpaste tube requires a lot of squeezing. I brush,
up down, up down, until the egg timer tells me I can stop. My soap
pump coughs forth a handful of foam only after I hit it several times
with my right palm. Its plastic body gasps and wheezes. When was
the last time I visited the drugstore? My head struggles to remember
and gives up. It feels fuzzy and padded with cotton wool, a good
omen for sleep.
In my bed I draw the covers up to my chin, refusing to submerge
myself further because it makes me claustrophobic. The moon is a
crescent in the blue-purple sky. I try to fix the image in my head so
that when I sleep I will see its benign glow. I hope it might banish
any darker images within my mind.
Chapter Twenty-three
September 8, 2000
Life is meant for living,
 I say, an expression favored by my mom.
She reserved it for my busy father when he would contend he could
not eat, see a movie, sleep, or visit friends.
This week Ben and I have been inside the courthouse each day,
all day, or most of it, and it is wearing me down. Watching the
jurors
 faces for signs of points won or lost, listening to the judge
overrule Landry
s objections, searching Ben
s face and body for
signs of illness. Dominic
s parents, Emily and Douglas, sit behind
me every day, eyes forward, hands clenched, shoulders slumped.
The oversized photographs, increased in size to show all the horrific details of Marcus
s beating, make me lose my appetite for lunch
and dinner.
I want to forget it all. That is why I am applying lipstick, making
that ridiculous fish face women do. It is why I am leaving to go to
Jessup
s, a bar music club.
My bag sails behind me as I exit the bathroom, and I am moving
so fast that I do not see Ben until I collide with him. My chest hits
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
his arm and I step back, electrified, seized with horror that his left
arm now knows what my right breast feels like.
Whoa,
 he says, hands up, palms out.
Sorry,
 I mumble.
What
s your hurry? Big date?
 He squints at my change of
clothes.
Well, have a nice time wherever you
re going.
 He steps forward, toward his office, his slow shuffle implying that some people
never rest in their pursuit of justice.
ll be sure to give Helen your regards,
 I call out as I saunter
away.
Helen?
 He has stopped and is frowning at me.
Helen Leland. You know, the reason God made miniskirts?
His face melts like an overheated ice-cream cone. I turn my back
on its comic promise and leave before he can say anything in his
defense.
Helen invited me, via a message left on my home phone, to hear
her friend
s band. She found my unlisted telephone number, resourceful girl. I called with a politely worded refusal crammed full of
trial-related excuses. I soon discovered that social coordinator Helen
Leland made defense attorney Helen Leland look like a Girl Scout.
She demolished my protests about having too much work, made several pointed comments about my lack of social life, and promised me
entertainment the likes of which I had never experienced.
As I pull my car into the deeply pitted blacktop of the club
parking lot I begin to reevaluate Helen
s promise. Could this be
right? The name on the faded wooden building reads jessup
s. My
fists seize with reluctance on the steering wheel. 
Life is meant for
living,
 I mutter. I turn the keys, grab my purse, and exit the car,
double-checking the locks.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
My half-jog stutters to a stop when I reach the door. Inside, I hear
Patsy Cline wailing about being crazy. Across the threshold is a smoky
room lit by out-of-season Christmas lights hung above a long bar. People crowd its wooden surface. Features are difficult to distinguish.
Natalie!
 Above the bar a hand is raised high, and I follow it
to Helen, who sits atop a stool. She wears jeans and a top cut low
enough to require a demibra. Her hair is pulled back into a ponytail
and her eyes are rimmed in kohl like an ancient Egyptian
s. I might
have walked past her without knowing her.
She nods to a stool upon which her black boots rest. 
Sit,
 she
orders, in a cheerful voice, swinging her legs down.
I obey. A wave brings the bartender to us. Built on mastodon
proportions, he slings a white dish towel over his shoulder. The
snake tattoo on his forearm writhes. He rests his splayed fingers on
the bartop, leans forward, and asks, 
What can I get you?
 His peppermint-scented breath surprises me.
My hesitation allows Helen to continue playing chief. 
mint juleps,
 she says.
The bartender steps back to do her bidding and I glance about,
repressing a cough. Most of the people look local. There are no
brightly patterned shirts that mark tourists as effectively as name
tags. I have yet to figure out why visitors feel they have to dress like
elderly Floridians.
Natalie, this is Pete,
 Helen says, introducing me to the impish
man to her right. He looks like a leprechaun, from his red hair to his
green tie. His freckles form small continents on his face.
Hi, Natalie,
 he says, his voice absent of Ireland. Pure Georgia,
low and drawly.
And this is Flora and Hank,
 Helen continues, gesturing to the
couple beside Pete. 
And Frank and Ellen and Gary and Lorraine
and Elisabeth.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
I smile wide and nod after each name is spoken.
When my drink arrives I reach for my purse. Helen smacks my
hand. 
You can get the next one,
 she says.
She raises her glass, says, 
To victory,
 and clinks her glass against
mine. I assume she means in the courtroom.
I take a sip and Helen smiles. 
Best mint juleps outside of my
Cousin Buttercup
 My raised brows say 
Buttercup?
 Her ponytail wags affirmation. 
That
s nothing. Her sister is known as 
Honeydew
 and the best thing is that their real names are Eugenia and
Bessamine.
Lorraine, overhearing, shares a story about her best friend named
Katherine, who was known as Kit to everyone and who fell in love
with a man by the name of Katt. 
The worst thing is that now
people just call her 
Candy
 or 
Chocolate,
 she said. Is Kit Katt
black like Lorraine? I wonder.
Helen sees my frown and smiles. 
Yes, Nat, she
s African American.
 She draws out the designation to make it sound silly. She turns
to Lorraine to confide, 
Nat is a Yankee and therefore sensitive to
such matters.
Lorraine bares her teeth. 
Uh-huh,
 she says. 
I lived in Delaware for a few months. Hated it.
I debate defending accusations of hailing from Delaware but decide it does not matter. Besides, Helen has a point. I have a difficult
time discussing race. A product of New England liberalism, I was
taught it was a matter discussed in the classroom, not outside.
So do you like zydeco music?
 Pete asks me, prompting a shrug.
I have no idea. He begins to explain its origins. My focus is diluted
by the increasing heat and noise.
A loud, sharp twang precedes a call of 
Test, un, deux, trois
from the stage. Several people begin clapping and cheering. Half of
Helen
s entourage walks to the stage where a drummer, bassist, and
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
roadie stand. Pete goes with them. I realize Helen doesn
t just know
a band member or two. She is with the band.
You like to dance?
 she shouts into my ear, her breath warm
and sweet.
Yes, but I have no rhythm.
Her smile is sirenous, capable of luring dead men to dance.
Great.
Do you come here often?
 I ask her.
Not often enough. I used to live here in my teens.
 She looks
about the bar as if checking it for changes. 
This is where I met
a few of those guys.
 Her ponytail bobs up as she leans forward.
They
ve been playing forever.
My own teenage years were spent in car pools, being shuffled
from debate team matches and yearbook meetings or to the nearest
T stop where my friends and I would travel to the movie featuring
the latest teen heartthrob.
So, Nat, what brought you to Macon?
 Her words catch up to
me a few seconds after she speaks them, the result of audio interference from the tuning band.
My heart stops, as it always does when confronted with this question. I am about to deliver my standard 
the city became too much
for me, I hated corporate law
 spiel but she rips the stool from underneath me with her, 
What sent you running away? Did you fuck
up a huge account? Or was it something worse, like love?
Unable to speak, I stare at her blue eyes, surrounded by black
liner. How did she know?
d put my money on love,
 she says as she turns to find the bartender. He finishes making change for two customers at the other
end of the bar before lumbering over to us. I bet he has never hurried anywhere. He may, in fact, be incapable of hurrying.
Yeah,
 I say, my voice croaky with secondhand smoke.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Men are pigs,
 she says. She swivels her stool to say to our bartender, 
Not you, Mikey. You
re too big to be a pig. A badly behaved
wild boar perhaps.
 Mikey
s mouth extends a millimeter in either
direction, his version of a smile.
I swallow a large sip of my second drink after laying a twenty on
the bar for him to transform into a handful of singles.
So you left New York brokenhearted, huh?
Her smile seems cruel until she explains, 
Everyone wondered
when you showed up, what the hell you were doing here. Aaron
Goldberg
s daughter. Some of the people in the DA
s office thought
you were infiltrating the system to take it down, some sort of 
civil
rights meets conspiracy theory
 thing. You kept up that lame excuse
of wanting a change from New York.
 Her grin tells me what she
thought of that idea. The frosty looks, the reticent hellos during my
first few weeks, all along I had assumed they were the result of being
a Northerner, an outsider, a woman, a Jew. And it turns out they
were afraid, unsure why I had come.
Not me. I figured anyone tired of New York wouldn
t choose
Macon.
She is right, of course, and why this has not struck me as obvious
I do not know. I wanted so badly for others to believe my cottoncandy lies that I failed to check if the story I constructed was too
sweet and insubstantial to consume.
You didn
t seem inclined to a career in the DA
s office.
 She
grins. 
But nowadays you come striding out of that courthouse
looking like God himself appointed you to the prosecution.
She leans back and hums under her breath. I cannot catch the
tune because the accordion and harmonica have joined to create
a duet.
Her insight renders me speechless. Does her X chromosome account for this wisdom or is experience lending her a hand? The
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
men are pigs
 comment makes me wonder. 
s dance,
 she says,
before the floor gets too crowded.
Is she kidding? There are only three people on the floor, shuffling to the accordion-heavy music. 
s going to fill fast. Trust me.
She grabs my wrist and tugs me from my perch. Oddly, I do trust
her. She sits at the opposite table during trials and she does not seem
the nurturing sort, but I find myself trusting her all the same. She
knew all along why I came to Macon and she didn
t say anything.
The band is like none I have ever seen or heard. There is an accordion player, a drummer, two guitarists, two singers (one armed
with a cowbell), a keyboardist, and a man wearing a ribbed piece of
metal. He has two sticks that he rubs up and down the metal, creating a funny zippity-zap sound. Helen
s friend Elisabeth notes my
fascination with the musical armor. 
s a vest frottoir,
 she explains,
causing me to search the recesses of my French-language memory.
A rub board,
 she adds. 
s what makes zydeco music zydeco.
She smiles. 
Here, move your hips more, bend your knees down
like this.
 She demonstrates a move that seems impossible or, at the
least, very dangerous. 
Zydeco has its own dance style.
 She nods to
my right. 
Helen is a champ. Watch her and you
ll pick it up.
Helen bends down with incredible speed and fervor. Her hips
rotate like a dreidel spinning out of control. Her ponytail bounces
and swings. Every male in the club and most of the women watch
as she moves, and she ignores them all, eyes closed.
Oh, sure. Just watch her. No problem.
Elisabeth laughs at my tone. She demonstrates how to step forward, turn, and bend. I try it and knock into the man beside me.
m hopeless,
 I confess.
No. Dancing is about happiness. You don
t have to follow steps.
See?
 She points to a couple who appear to be dancing a jitterbug.
I decide I would rather have one more drink. When I reach the
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
bar Mikey stands, arms like slabs of meat, crossed against his chest.
He watches the dancers, but I cannot tell if he is amused, interested,
or bored. 
May I have another mint julep?
You don
t like to dance?
 he asks, grabbing a glass from under
the bar.
Dancing doesn
t like me,
 I tell him. 
Never has.
That same fractional smile appears on his face as he places the
drink before me. He waves away my money. 
This one is on the
house,
 he tells me in a tone that robs me of any response except
thank you.
Helen was right. The dance floor fills fast. Couples and individuals bop along to the crazy rhythms. Pete, the leprechaun, plays
drums in the band and he winks at me halfway through a song,
causing me to raise my glass in salute. The Christmas lights twinkle
in my ice cubes. I close my eyes and breathe in the scent of gin,
sweat, smoke, and grapefruit. Grapefruit? I open my eyes to see
Helen standing before me, panting. She is the source of the citrus
scent. Before I can ask what perfume she is wearing she hauls me
to my feet.
mon, lush,
 she says, tugging harder when I dig my heels into
the sticky floor.
Uh-uh,
 I tell her. 
I can
t do what you
re doing out there. Besides, it
s more fun to watch.
Accepting my mulish resistance for what it is, she hops atop her
abandoned bar stool and tells Mikey to tell her friend to dance.
Mikey
s snake ripples as he wipes a tumbler clean.
Nope,
 he says, setting the glass down and picking up another
from the damp wood behind him.
Her brows rise an inch. 
What did you do to win his heart?
 she
demands, swiveling her stool top in time to the music, unable to
stop dancing even while seated.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Nothing.
He usually does what I tell him. Men.
 A lot of weariness is
contained in that final syllable. 
So what was wrong with Mr. New
York, anyway?
 She picks up our predance conversation like a mislaid beat.
The tumbler is cold beneath my fingers. I push it from me.
He was married and a liar,
 I say, staring into the small mirror
behind the bar. It allows me a glimpse of the back of Mikey
s right
shoulder moving forward in small circles as he rubs at a glass. Just
beside his shoulder is a portion of my face: lit yellow and red by the
lights above. My lipstick has not survived.
Ugh,
 she mutters. 
Did he promise he would leave his wife
and marry you?
I shake my head, glad that Mikey has moved down the bar to
attend to some thirsty dancers.
Well, that
s something, then. Nothing like an unfaithful man
making marriage promises to turn your stomach.
 Against my will I
smile. Her matter-of-fact pronouncement, delivered in her honeyed
voice, seems funny. I laugh.
You know that ruby ring auctioned at Hay House?
She stops swiveling and scrunches her face. 
Yeah,
 she says.
That was a gift from him.
Now it is her turn to laugh. 
Good for you. And for a good
cause, too. Even better.
 She leaves her stool. 
One dance,
 she says.
Just one.
 She holds up her forefinger. 
ll show you.
I am hopeless,
 I tell her but she is already ahead of me, stepping fast, clearing a path before her. I follow in her wake and tell
myself that just one dance will be okay. I can do it, maybe.
Chapter Twenty-four
September 10, 2000
The wind is picking up. The heads of the swamp sunflowers bob,
and their small yellow petals quiver in the breeze. I tell Lala that I
always thought sunflower seeds resembled eyes. She sits across from
me, sipping a cup of coffee and brandy. I hold a matching mug in
my hand. We are enjoying the dregs of Sunday evening. I should be
indoors, but I could not resist the flowers.
Found a cantaloupe in the tomatoes this morning,
 she says,
squinting at the vegetable garden. 
Complete surprise. I didn
t plant
cantaloupes.
You grew a cantaloupe by accident?
Yup.
A real cantaloupe? By accident? Well, ain
t that berries!
Lala smiles at my use of one of her favorite phrases. 
They are
called volunteers.
 She sips her coffee and smiles.
What?
Seedlings that take root where you don
t intend them to grow.
Misplaced seeds a bird drops or the wind scatters, or a fruit or veg-
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
etable in your compost pile that reproduces. They are called volunteers, accidental transplants.
Accidental transplants,
 I repeat.
The cantaloupe sprouted from one I had thrown onto my compost. If I had weeded the tomato section better it would have died,
but as it is, it grew and I had a treat for breakfast.
You ate it?
 I cannot keep the disappointment from my voice.
There is a piece left if you would like some.
 She begins to
rise.
No, no, I
m not hungry. Sit. Please. I just wondered what it
looked like.
Like any other cantaloupe, perhaps a little smaller. Tasted
mighty fine.
Not as good as your coffee, I
m sure.
 I wonder if Helen drinks
coffee this way, if it
s a Southern thing, or merely a Lala thing.
Better than those fancy coffee drinks people pay four dollars
for.
 She sips her drink to prove her point.
The hum of nearby bees makes me drowsy, that and the brandy.
I wonder whether bees like alcohol or only alcohol that tastes sweet
or maybe it doesn
t matter. Lala rouses me from my mazy mental
wanderings. 
Nat, there
s someone at your door.
I turn to look over the gate at my front door but the blooming
Aussie Plume
s thick, ribbed leaves obscure my view. 
Probably Jehovah
s Witnesses or Girl Scouts,
 I tell Lala. 
ll just be a minute.
When I reach my front yard I see that there is only one person at
my door. Proselytizers tend to travel in pairs, and Girl Scouts are far
younger than the woman standing on my steps. She turns as I say
Can I help you?
 and I see her face. Sarah, Carl
s sister. She carries
a giant straw bag on her shoulder, big enough to carry an infant.
Miss Goldberg?
 She shadows her eyes with her hand. I am
standing in the setting sun.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Sarah, is everything okay?
 In front of the house is a small blue
compact car, not the minivan Sarah drove to the shelter.
Everything is fine.
 She sees where I am looking and gestures
toward the car. 
That
s my aunt
 After a brief hesitation she asks,
Could I speak with you?
Sure,
 I say, wiping my palms against the front of my shorts.
I feel exposed, in my play clothes, in my yard, an ordinary woman
on a Sunday.
I tell her to follow me and backtrack to Lala
s. I told Lala I
would return. Besides, the notion of inviting Sarah into my home
disturbs me. I am reluctant to reveal my life to her, conscious of my
hypocrisy. I barged into her home and life without so much as a
by-your-leave.
She follows me through the gate, claps her hands together and
exclaims, 
Oh! How lovely!
 I am pleased by her admiration. Lala
garden deserves it.
Lala, I brought . . . a friend.
 How else to introduce Sarah?
Lala looks at me before rising to say 
How do you do?
 I wag
my head a little and she says, 
Would you like a drink? I won
t be
a minute.
 Before Sarah can respond, Lala is headed for the house.
Wonderful Lala, catching my signal. I think Sarah and I might need
a little privacy.
Sarah has to peer into the fishpond and look at the rocks surrounding the pool before she sits. I explain about the rocks, how
Lala
s friends gather them and bring them to her.
She asks a few questions about the neighborhood and how long
I have lived in it. I surprise myself with my response. 
Fourteen
months.
 Has it really been so long?
How nice,
 she says.
I wonder when she will talk about whatever it is that made her
drive all this way to see me. Her face is whole again, unmarred by
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
bruises. She is pretty, but her eyes are worried. I wonder if that will
ever change.
I ask about the children. She tells me that they are well, and
making friends in their new school. She was worried about registering them, unsure how to explain her status as not-quite-single
parent to the schoolteachers and principal. 
I found out I
m not
the only mom in the school system with the same problem. There
is another woman, Mabel Damon.
 She pauses and looks at me, as
if expecting I know her.
Has William done anything?
Except try to prove I
m crazy so he can take the children away?
Her laugh is brittle. 
No, nothing. I
m drawing up divorce papers. I
expect he may try something when he gets them. Although . . .
What?
Well, he did kill Captain, the dog.
 She brushes a spot beneath
her eyes.
m sorry. I
m so very sorry.
 I am, for Sarah and the kids and
most especially Captain, who was only a dog and had no idea what
he had done to drive his master into a rage.
I didn
t come to tell you that. I came because I wanted to
explain. I . . . didn
t . . . I wasn
t . . .
 She exhales, a long whoosh
of air.
Take your time,
 I tell her.
She leans forward, and I notice her feet are tiny, smaller than
mine.
I wasn
t very nice to you, when you came. I was upset and angry
and scared, especially for the kids. William had been worse lately.
The week before you came he grabbed Billy by the back of his shirt
and pushed him toward the counter, hard. Billy managed to stop
himself from hitting the counter, but it was close.
 She shudders.
He had never hurt the kids before.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Just you, I think.
When you came, well, it seemed like a sign. I knew everything
you said was true. I was just afraid to leave him.
I understand.
Anyway, I never said thank you. Carl said he and Mom got you
a present.
Yes.
 I lift the chai from my neck so she can see it. 
s the Jewish symbol for life.
Sarah nods. 
Our maternal grandmother was Jewish.
I am surprised. Carl is part Jew?
Our grandfather didn
t convert, and neither did she. I remember visiting them for holidays when I was very little. There was a
Christmas tree and a menorah.
 She smiles. 
William freaked out
when he heard about Grandma Sarah. Said he didn
t know he had
married a Jew.
 Her smile disappears, and she turns an apologetic
face to me.
ve heard worse.
 I have, from people whose opinions matter
more than William
I came here to say thank you, and to give you something.
 She
fishes in her bag and withdraws a tissue-wrapped rectangle that is
creased and taped in many different places. 
The kids wrapped it.
They sure did. It takes me half a minute to tear apart the tissue
to reveal a photograph of Billy, Lily, and Sarah, standing in front of
a petting zoo. The kids stand on either side of their mother, faces
sticky with some treat, grinning. They look happy.
Our new family photograph,
 she says.
Thank you.
Lala calls out from the back porch. 
Thirsty?
 She holds a wicker
tray loaded with several glasses. I hurry forward to take it from her.
Lala says, 
I brought a selection. Lemonade, iced tea, or coffee and
juice.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Coffee and juice?
 Sarah
s nose wrinkles.
Brandy,
 I explain. 
s what we
re drinking.
Oh, I
ll have iced tea, since I have to drive back.
Would you like to stay to dinner?
 Lala asks. I marvel at her
easy acceptance of visitors. It is a Southern trait I wish I came by.
I have to get back soon. I
m helping sew costumes for the kids
school play.
I remember sewing school costumes,
 Lala says. 
I made the
mistake of being rather skilled with needle and thread. Years after my children left school I would receive calls from their former
teachers asking if I might spare some time for the school pageant.
She sips her mug. 
It was fun seeing the children in those outfits.
I have no sewing stories to share. No kids-in-costume tales,
either.
Lala and Sarah reminisce about favorite costumes and I rub the
faux gold picture frame between my thumb and forefinger. Evening
falls around us. Bugs sing and the sunflowers begin disappearing in
the dusk.
I should really go,
 Sarah says.
s been lovely talking with you. Come again, and bring your
children,
 Lala says.
I tell Lala I will be back to wash out my mug. She says 
Pshaw,
and promises to let me wash up another day.
Sarah follows me to my yard. We stand outside her car. 
Would
you like to come inside?
 I ask. 
Use the bathroom?
 She has another two hours of driving ahead of her.
No, thank you.
 She jiggles her keys in her palm and tilts her
head toward the house. 
This is a lovely house. Do you own it?
No, I rent, although my landlady wants to sell and she has offered me first dibs.
You should take it. The garden next door is worth it.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I haven
t decided yet.
She does not say anything more and I feel awkward for resisting
her suggestion. Instead I thank her for visiting and say, 
I . . . well,
I felt bad about how I treated you that day. I wasn
t very nice. I just
pushed and pushed.
I needed the push.
 She steps forward and gives me a hug. Her
thin arms have muscles mine do not. She smells like vanilla and
powder.
If you want to stop by sometime,
 I begin. How is it Lala issues
invitations so easily, so graciously? Why can
t I?
Maybe we will. The kids would love to see their uncle Carl. He
spoils them.
And Sarah, I am very sorry about Captain. I wish
I know,
 she says.
I watch her get in her car and drive away until her taillights
disappear around the corner. Then I enter the house that I cannot
commit to buying because I am imprisoned in limbo.
When I came to Macon it was the result of a decision made in
the heat of anger, inspired by Henry
s duplicity and Walter
s and
MacLittle
s smugness. I would show them. I would become a public
prosecutor. Stupid to think I could make an impact on those men.
Do they even remember my name?
I turned my life upside down, and now . . . now what? I have
alienated my parents and disappointed my father. I am embroiled in
a capital murder trial, prosecuting alongside a conservative Southerner who reduces me to muttering Yiddish phrases. In my spare
time I become involved in a domestic abuse case that follows me
home. I am learning about zydeco music and gardening and how to
drink coffee and juice. I have destroyed all hope of completing the
life plan I drew up at age fifteen.
I cannot be the famous civil liberties lawyer my father is, and I
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
no longer want to be. My work is as important. I can safeguard the
living from threats of violence; I can work to avenge the dead. I can
protect the wounded from future harm, or try.
Can I live here, in Macon, Georgia, permanently? In a place
where my whiteness makes me a minority? Where the death penalty
laws I uphold set my teeth on edge?
Maybe I am a volunteer, like Lala
s accidental cantaloupe. My
path was supposed to lead elsewhere, but here I am.
I fetch a glass of water and settle into my favorite armchair. Beside it is the Gentry deposition. I found a flaw in it. Tomorrow Ben
and I will discuss it before we head for the courthouse. I squint at
the small print and try to concentrate, forgetting everything else:
Sarah, my landlady, Ben, and especially Captain, the dog I couldn
save.
Chapter Twenty-five
September 13, 2000
Judge Pullman assigns a high value to food. Rather than transition
from the prosecution resting to the defense
s start, he decides to
break for lunch. Ben and I discuss whether it is better that the jurors spend the next ninety minutes contemplating our work, or if it
would have been preferable to begin dismantling the defense
s case
immediately. We talk on the way to the office, where we agree to
spend our extended lunch catching up on other cases.
Before I can reach the sanctum of my office I encounter Carl.
He sees me and waves. Then he begins tapping a folder against his
chest. Is he ever still? 
 I say, walking fast.
Hi, Nat. How are you?
Good.
 I keep walking.
Um, Nat?
 He is following me. Damn.
Yes?
 I turn around. His Bermuda-acquired tan looks fantastic
against his light gray suit, and his hair is streaked even blonder.
My brain cannot help but remind me, at this moment, that Carl
is part Jew.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Sarah called last night. She said she visited you?
Yes.
She seemed okay? She sounded good, on the phone, but
She seemed to be doing very well. It was good to see her.
m glad.
 He is still tapping the folder against his chest.
ve gotta go. I
m on lunch break and I have tons to catch up
 I glance at my watch.
Right, sorry. I just wanted to check. Thanks again.
s going to be okay, Carl.
 I step forward and squeeze his arm.
His bicep tenses beneath my hand.
He nods and steps back. I notice he has stopped tapping that
damn folder, at last.
At my desk, my attention wanders from a police investigation
into a recent armed burglary to my computer
s monitor, which
whirls through the artificial cosmos of a screen-saver pattern. I
touch the mouse, and the stars disappear. Online I search airline
prices. Atlanta to New York. Three hundred dollars seems to be the
average, unless I am willing to connect through Chicago. I am not.
My finger hovers over the mouse. The arrow hangs over the button that will bring me to a new flight search. I tap the mouse, so
gently nothing happens. I tap it harder, angered by my own indecision. New York to Boston. An hour-and-six-minute flight from La
Guardia to Logan. I haven
t been home since Hanukkah last year,
and I kept that visit to two days because I was assisting on a manslaughter case. The stilted conversation about my new job, my new
place, my new friends (aside from Lala, I couldn
t claim any), and
my new attitude (they claimed I had developed one) ached like a
sore tooth. My mother
s attempts to infuse holiday spirit into the
visit only made it worse.
The lighting of the menorah emphasized the brevity of my visit,
as I would be gone before all eight candles were lit. The silly things
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I had loved as a child: the gilt dreidel that once belonged to my
mother, the set of badly formed candles I had made in Hebrew
school, and the moth-eaten stocking I had insisted we hang on the
mantel when I was five, seemed small and sad. They were reminders
of happier times, but they did not make me smile more or resent my
parents
 questions less. They only revealed how wide the chasm was
between the past and the present, how unbridgeable.
Tick tock, tick tock,
 Ben calls. I turn about to find him in my
doorway, peering at me. I pat my jacket down, as if running an illegal-weapons search on myself. Nervous gesture. I don
t want him
to know that I was looking at airplane flight prices when I should
have been doing a thousand other things.
m ready,
 I say, and grab my briefcase.
He nods, as if agreeing. He does it all the time. Nods when people say things that don
t call for recognition. It alarms me to realize
I can recognize this and several other of his quirks. Has he learned
my jacket-patting habit or does he merely see me do things without
considering why?
We step outside into sunshine so bright I squint in pain. Damn.
I forgot my sunglasses upstairs, just like yesterday.
Landry is going to try to introduce the death penalty. Just you
watch,
 Ben warns.
He can
 Landry is poised to begin introducing his witnesses.
The verdict is far from in. Only if we get a guilty verdict can he
discuss sentencing.
Watch. He
ll try.
Good luck to him,
 I say, aware that Judge Pullman will crush
any attempt to introduce such premature discussions.
I suppose you think that
s okay?
What?
You think Landry ought to be able to soften the jury up now,
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
for sentencing? Rather than wait until the case has been decided.
His tone is dismissive.
What? No! I meant that Pullman won
t allow it.
 I quicken
my pace, though I am perspiring. 
When are you going to accept
that I am not trying to sabotage this case?
 My feet move faster,
speed-walking now. 
I work ninety-hour weeks and spend my free
time reading ballistics reports and revising my cross-examination. I
drink Maalox by day and wine by night. When will you be satisfied?
When I
m lying in a hospital bed beside you being treated for an
ulcer the size of Canada?
 I have stopped on the sidewalk. Cars slow
as they drive past, staring at me waving my briefcase and shouting
at the older gentleman in front of me.
s face grows red. His mouth opens but no words come out.
You have it so goddamn easy. For you this is open-and-shut.
Send a guy to the chair, no problem.
 I step forward. 
I don
t think
humans should have the right to take away life, even a murderer
s. You can call me crazy. Call me a stupid Yankee Jew liberal
bitch, but do not ever call me disloyal or impugn my professional
reputation.
I turn on my heel and stride forward, not looking behind to
see if his jaw is still unhinged. I stare ahead, at the cupola of the
courthouse where the clock shows that it
s 1:25. I look down at my
watch: 1:15.
My feet slow as Ben
s tasseled loafers approach. It will not do
for us to appear in court looking as though we just had a fight on
Mulberry Street for the entire world to witness. What was the name
of that Dr. Seuss book my mother used to read me? And to Think
That I Saw It on Mulberry Street? Indeed.
Goldberg.
 I turn. His tomato coloring has faded to salmon.
He is panting, out of breath, as if he ran half a mile instead of hurrying a few steps. Is he going to keel over?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I stand, waiting for what
s coming. Ben breathes in and out a
few times, staring at me as if I might explode again. 
I didn
t mean
to imply that you haven
t worked hard on this case.
 Now it is time
for my jaw to unhinge. 
You have, and I know it hasn
t been made
any easier by my absence from the office.
 Of all the moments to go
grateful, he has to choose now.
I never partnered with anyone who didn
t support capital punishment.
 He stares at the courthouse
s columns as if they can explain why he got stuck with me. 
Not on a capital case.
I nod. 
We don
t see eye to eye on a lot of things, and we never
will. That
s fine. But I can
t stand having you look at me as if I
m less
committed because of my views.
Aren
t you?
 He said it. I didn
t think he would. I shift my
weight to my back foot and meet Ben
s unblinking stare.
No. If anything, I am more committed. I have something to
prove that you don
t. The job comes first.
 I sigh before adding,
After all, I can always sign Amnesty International petitions when
m off duty.
His eyes widen but he doesn
t say anything.
re going to be late,
 I say, gesturing toward the clock face.
It reads 1:30.
It doesn
t keep proper time, you know.
I know.
Landry begins the afternoon by introducing his first witness,
Rufus Wellington. Rufus was at the club where Marcus Rhodes
and Calvin Washington argued and where Calvin was overheard
to tell Marcus he would 
beat him down until his mama wouldn
recognize him
 if he didn
t stop talking trash about the Redskins.
Marcus continued to belittle Calvin
s favorite team, calling all their
fans 
faggots
 until his friend Fred Johnson pulled him aside. He
warned Marcus not to taunt Calvin because Calvin ran with a tough
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
crew and had been known to send people who pissed him off to the
emergency ward.
Rufus, dressed in a suit that bunches over his chest, raises his
right hand and swears to tell the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. We, the prosecution, maintain a healthy skepticism about
this.
Mr. Wellington, were you present at Club Bling on March
twenty-fifth?
Yes.
Did you witness a conversation between Mr. Washington and
the deceased, Marcus Rhodes, at that time?
Yes.
 Rufus stares at Calvin. Calvin stares back, his mouth
curved up at the corners. Is this his happy face?
Could you describe that conversation?
Rufus looks at Landry as if he holds a conductor
s baton. 
Calvin was talking about sports and Marcus interrupted to say that the
Redskins . . . um, sucked.
 Ben looks at me with eyes that say, 
This
kid is reluctant to use the word 
suck
? Nice acting job.
And how did Mr. Washington respond?
 Landry will never say
defendant,
 will always refer to Calvin by name, in an attempt to
humanize him.
Calvin told Marcus he didn
t know what he was talking
about.
Did Mr. Washington threaten the victim?
 Rufus answers before Landry has finished the question.
You earlier heard testimony from Mr. Fred Johnson that Calvin
Washington threatened to beat Marcus Rhodes. Are you saying that
this exchange did not take place?
 Landry approaches the jury box
as he speaks, pulling their attention toward him.
No. Calvin never said that. He told Marcus to shut up, but he
didn
t say he
d hurt him or nothing.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Are you certain?
Yeah.
And how did this encounter end?
With Marcus dead on an elementary-school classroom floor.
That
s how it ended.
Marcus
s homie pulled him away. He could see what a jerk
Marcus was being, so he made him stop talking trash.
A small rustle in the court alerts me to the fact that Fred Johnson
is probably manifesting displeasure at this interpretation of events.
Judge Pullman bangs the gavel and reminds everyone that he will
not tolerate any disruption in his court. His gray eyes burn a hole
behind me. He urges Landry to continue with a 
Please proceed,
counselor.
No further questions.
Rufus begins to rise so Ben stands and says, 
Excuse me, Mr.
Wellington. If you wouldn
t mind?
 He looks at the witness chair.
Pullman says, 
Mr. Wellington, if you
ll take your seat I believe
the prosecution may have some questions for you.
 Ben nods to the
judge and Landry waves his hand before him.
Your witness,
 he says, attempting to regain control of the
moment.
Mr. Wellington, where were you when the defendant and the
victim were having their . . . ah . . . discussion?
 Ben
s prevarication
makes it clear that he wants to use a stronger word. It
s better than if
he used the word 
fight,
 provoking Landry to object.
At the bar.
About how far away were you from the defendant and Mr.
Rhodes?
I don
t know. Close enough. I could hear everything.
I see. What act was performing the night of March twentyfifth?
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Gangsta Nation.
 Rufus appears amused by the question.
I see. And were they playing during this exchange?
Rufus nods, prompting Pullman to instruct him to respond verbally. 
Yes.
And how would you characterize the volume level?
What?
I am curious as to how you would describe the noise level in
the club during the conversation between the defendant and the
victim.
Oh. It was loud, but not real loud. I was close by, so I could
hear everything.
Juror number three, Mrs. Little, wrinkles her nose. She does this
when she suspects someone is pulling her leg. I had seen her do
it before, during Fred
s testimony. Nice to see that she applies the
same standard to the defense.
Mr. Wellington, would you be surprised to know that the police
received five noise-complaint calls on the night of March twentyfifth relating to the show at Club Bling that evening?
The shoulders of his suit jacket strain as Rufus shrugs. 
People
complain about noise and stuff all the time. They probably just
t like that style of music.
I see. So you didn
t find the noise to be overwhelming? In fact
you found it to be so low that you could overhear a conversation
held within the club at a distance of several feet from you?
Yes.
 His vehement assertion holds the line, but jurors number
five and seven are frowning. Sometimes the more inflexible a witness is, the more doubtful the jurors find him.
No further questions.
 Ben did not discredit him, but he did
raise doubt. We presented our version. They presented theirs.
Counselor?
 The judge looks to Landry, who rises and asks Rufus, 
Mr. Wellington, are you at all hearing impaired?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
No. My hearing always tested excellent.
The wrinkles that appear on Ben
s face alert me to his desire
to question these 
tests
 but he refrains, probably concluding that
placing too much emphasis on them may credit Rufus
s testimony
more than we wish.
Thank you, Mr. Wellington. That is all.
We decline to ask any further questions. Rufus steps down from
the stand and walks away. Witness number one gone. I stare at Ben
sloped nose in profile and wonder how he thinks he did. Impossible
to say, but I think he is pleased. He isn
t clenching his pen like he
does when he is upset. Dear God, you would think we were married, the way I have learned his mannerisms.
Landry calls his second witness, Loretta Dalton, a schoolteacher
at Burke Elementary School and the last person known to have
seen Marcus Rhodes besides his murderer. I sit a little straighter
and watch a pale woman in a plaid print dress approach the witness box.
Her testimony seems irrelevant. Aside from characterizing Marcus Rhodes as a slack employee and confirming that she saw him
cleaning at 5:25 p.m. on March 28 she offers little. She does mention that Marcus
s regrettable tendency to not dust the classrooms
could account for old fingerprints existing on doorframes. Is Landry
serious? Does he actually believe the jury will swallow the notion
that Calvin was in the school months or years earlier and that explains why his prints were found in that schoolroom?
Ms. Dalton is the final witness of the day. The late, elongated
lunch pushed us into the afternoon and Judge Pullman assesses that
it is unlikely we will get through the testimony and cross-examination of the next witness, Abraham Gentry. My stomach somersaults,
relieved and distressed by the postponement of my courtroom duty.
Ben and I exit the courtroom together and separate, by silent as205
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
sent, at the corner. He walks west on Second and I head up Walnut,
toward the office.
I stop at the office long enough to grab a handful of tampons
from the stash I keep in my office. I don
t want to stop at the drugstore. I head out, lowering my head, a charging bull, trying to discourage questions about how I am or how the case is proceeding. It
works. No one asks me anything.
My briefcase seems to have gained weight, straining my arm as
I ascend my driveway. While winding my way through the accumulating debris of the past week
telephone books to be recycled,
clothes to be dry-cleaned, things I have used and not returned to
their proper place
I am suddenly caught short. It looks a little like
s office.
Shit,
 I mutter, dropping the briefcase, refusing to carry it an
inch farther. I extract a tampon before heading to the bathroom,
remembering that my towels need to be laundered.
The blinking light of my answering machine stops me. Check
now or wait? I tap the tampon against my thigh and consider.
What are the chances it is extraordinarily good news? I go to the
bathroom.
When I reemerge I find myself staring at the pulsing red light,
unwilling to depress the play button, to allow whatever is inside
out. Pandora
s box. I scold myself for being dramatic and reach
forward.
Natalie? It
s Adam Griffon, from Harvard.
 My muscles relax.
m headed your way soon. I
m driving from a conference in Atlanta
to a wedding in Savannah and I heard you had moved to Georgia
so I called your parents.
 Oh, no, my mother will remember how
well mannered Adam is and how Jewish. Damn. 
They gave me
your phone number. I hope you don
t mind. Anyway, if you are free
I would love to see you, maybe have dinner? I
m traveling with my
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
girlfriend, Sonya. Sonya Patterson. She was a year below us. I
m not
sure if you knew her.
 Oh, yes. The blonde with the slight lisp and
the funny striped scarf she wore from September until May. 
So if
re available we
d love to meet you. We expect to be in town on
Saturday, the ah . . . twenty-third.
Adam recites three telephone numbers where he can be reached
and wishes me a good week. Adam and Sonya. I would not have
pictured them together. Sonya came from a hippie commune and
Adam always wore a tie, perfectly knotted.
Into the kitchen to look at the calendar. Saturday the twentythird is ten days away and I have no conflicting plans. The trial
might be over by then. I grab a pen to make note of the numbers
Adam left, resolving to call tomorrow to say I would be happy to
meet him and Sonya for dinner. As the tape rewinds with a screech,
I become conscious that not too long ago I would have invented an
excuse to avoid meeting a former classmate.
Adam was a good friend, but after law school we lost touch. He
will want to hear about New York and why I came to Macon. I will
tell him I hated corporate law and wanted to explore criminal law
and that it is fascinating. I will not tell him about Henry and the
partners. As far as I am concerned they are no longer part of the
story.
Chapter Twenty-six
September 14, 2000
Today is the day. I am cross-examining a witness. The training
wheels are off. It is time to perform before the audience of friends
and families of both the victims and the defendant, of newspaper
reporters, of judge, jury, defense, and, most important, Ben.
Judge Pullman enters the room and the gentle swell of conversation ebbs into silence. Landry takes his witness, Mr. Abraham Gentry, through his testimony. The pale man seated in the witness box
is the fifty-two-year-old factory employee who claims he saw Calvin
Washington at the Columbus gas station at six-thirty p.m. on Tuesday, March 28. The murders happened around that time. The jury
will not believe that our prime suspect was filling his gas tank while
we claim he was killing two people. We must make them choose.
Landry walks Mr. Gentry through his sighting, asking him if
the man he saw that evening is in the courtroom and then asking
him to point to the man. Asking the court to please note that the
witness gestured to the defendant, Mr. Calvin Washington. Calvin
sits straight and silent, but his taut face appears to relax when Mr.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Gentry points to him. Landry asks Mr. Gentry if he is sure and Mr.
Gentry says he is positive. The word 
liar
 appears in my head like
a cartoon bubble before I can stop it from forming. I do not think
he is lying. He believes that the man he saw at the gas station was
Calvin Washington, but he is wrong.
Landry finishes, thanking Mr. Gentry for his service. Then he
turns to Ben and me. 
Your witness,
 he says with all the politeness
of a person offering you sugar for your tea.
I rise on legs less sturdy than I prefer. I walk about the table
right side, my side, the side nearer the jurors. Bile rises in my throat;
I swallow the bitter liquid. Stage fright, I get it something awful. I
walk forward, breathing through my nose.
Standing before the witness box I shift my weight. Even in my
heels the rail of the well-polished pine box reaches my breastbone. I
must look like a miniadult to the jurors and courtroom spectators.
Let them see me small. Let the witness think me little.
Mr. Gentry, you said you saw Calvin Washington at the Sunoco
gas station at six-thirty p.m. on March twenty-eighth?
 My voice is
soft, my tone gentle, apologetic for making him repeat himself.
Yes.
You are sure it was six-thirty p.m.?
 Again I am gentle.
Yes.
May I ask how you knew it was six-thirty?
 With this I turn to
glance at Ben behind me, who sits, watching me as if I am about to
throw the World Series, Bill Buckner style.
I checked my watch a few minutes before I went to get the gas,
and it was just before six-thirty.
I look back at Ben as if to say, 
What next?
 Letting Gentry
think I am acting on Ben
s command will make him regard me as
less dangerous. I return my attention to Mr. Gentry. 
And when did
you see the defendant?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Six-thirty.
 Somebody titters.
No, Mr. Gentry, I meant when, while you were at the gas station, did you see him? Was he there when you pulled up or did he
drive in while you were pumping gas?
He was there when I pulled in.
 He is not offering more than
I am asking. Landry and his team coached him well. Extraneous
details are like shoelaces, easily tripped over.
Inside or outside his car?
Outside, filling his tank.
I sigh, as if I wished he had answered differently. 
And how long
was he there?
He was still there when I drove off.
 Mr. Gentry crosses his
legs, relaxing his rigid posture. He knows all the answers to my
questions.
And when did you leave the gas station?
About five minutes later. I filled up my tank, paid inside, and
left. He
Mr. Gentry nods toward Calvin Washington
was still
standing by his car when I left.
I see. Did you recognize the car the defendant was driving?
 I tilt
my head, birdlike, inquisitive. Tell me all about cars, my gesture says.
Mr. Gentry responds to my feminine plea with a sheepish grin.
It was one of them new cars, the flashy ones. An Acura, I think.
Red.
 Juror five
s eyebrows are raised in what looks to be disbelief.
Apparently he has trouble crediting a witness who cannot identify a
s make, model, and year on sight.
Mr. Washington drives a 1999 Acura NSX.
 I walk back toward our table and withdraw a shiny photograph of the car from
my folder. I submit it into evidence. 
Mr. Gentry, is this the type of
car you saw?
He nods, relieved. He is still answering everything, still at the
head of his class.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
s a popular car,
 I say, turning to include the jury. A few sit
straighter and watch me. This is part of the job. Making sure you do
not lose their attention, keeping them focused. 
In fact, it was one
of the most popular cars sold in 1999. So lots of people own them.
Landry shifts in his seat, staring at me, not ready to insist that
the judge make me make my point, but he is considering it. I save
him the effort with my next question.
Mr. Gentry, how many people, other than the defendant, were
at the gas station that day?
Two.
Two?
Two.
 He is confident again.
Could you describe the two other people you saw at the gas
station?
A man and a woman, in a truck.
A man and a woman in a truck. What sort of truck?
Black.
 His predilection for describing cars by their color is
causing juror five to twitch.
A black truck. Did you notice the model?
It was a Chevy, I think.
You think?
Yes. A Chevy. New.
A new black Chevy.
 By stringing the words together slowly, like
beads on a string, I reveal how empty they are, how lacking in substance. 
What about the passengers? Could you describe them?
A man and a woman. She had sunglasses on.
Were they inside the truck?
No, they were outside, pumping gas.
Both of them?
He was. She wasn
t. She was just standing there.
And did you notice their clothes, other than the sunglasses?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Blue jeans. And a T-shirt. And sneakers, or boots.
Both of them?
He hesitates. 
Yeah.
I manage to swing a 
what woman dresses like her companion?
look toward the jury. No matter that many women wear jeans and
T-shirts. It just sounds so convenient for this couple to be dressed
as twins.
And Mr. Washington? How was he dressed?
 For once I do not
refer to him as the defendant.
He had long shorts and a basketball jersey. Black and red. It
was a Chicago Bulls shirt, number twenty-three, and high-top
sneakers.
A Michael Jordan Chicago Bulls basketball jersey atop long
shorts, with sneakers. That is quite a description. May I ask why
you are able to recall Mr. Washington
s attire so clearly when you
seem less specific about the mystery couple
s outfits?
Objection,
 Landry interjects. 
The prosecution
s reference to a
mystery couple is uncalled for.
Sustained,
 the judge responds. 
Miss Goldberg, please watch
your use of adjectives.
Yes, Your Honor.
 The jurors won
t forget what I said.
Mr. Gentry, why did Mr. Washington
s attire make such an impression on you?
He seemed more noticeable.
 Mr. Gentry shifts in his seat, his
movement more squirming than settling down.
Because he was a young black man? Possibly. However, I need
to show Gentry
s memory is specific because it is based on another
image, a different memory.
Mr. Gentry, you have stated that you saw only a man and a
woman besides the defendant at the gas station. What about the
sales clerk? Did you forget to pay for your gas?
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Oh, him. Yeah, I saw the clerk, too. Young kid. He
s there most
evenings.
And yet he didn
t recall seeing the defendant.
He probably sees a lot of people, and can
t remember them all.
Mr. Gentry sits a bit straighter.
I see. Mr. Gentry, when did you notify the police that you had
seen Mr. Washington at the gas station?
On March thirty-first.
And what prompted you to telephone the police?
 I look out
the windows, implying that his answer doesn
t mean much.
I saw a news clip that showed that he
Mr. Gentry nods toward Calvin
had been arrested for murder. I heard the anchorman say that the murder had taken place on the evening of March
twenty-eighth. I realized I had seen him that evening, so I telephoned them.
Did the news account say when the murder had taken place?
am skating atop a knife
s edge here. It is important to help him out
so that I can crush him. Tricky.
No, just that it happened on the evening of the twenty-eighth.
So when you telephoned the police you had no idea what sort
of information you were providing?
Some of the jurors shift, their faces scrunched in thought.
Good.
Pardon?
 Mr. Gentry cannot foresee where I am headed,
either.
I am sorry,
 I say, offering a small smile. 
What I mean is that
when you called the police to inform them that you had seen the
defendant at the gas station in Columbus, you did not know that
you were providing him with an alibi for the time of the murders.
Is that correct?
Yes,
 he affirms. For all he knew, he had spotted the murderer
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
fleeing the scene of the crime. Only he did not. He did not see the
murderer until today.
I have established that Mr. Gentry did not seek to acquit Mr.
Washington of a crime, increasing his witness credibility. Time to
destroy that.
Mr. Gentry, when you saw the person you have identified as the
defendant did you notice anything particular about him aside from
his clothing?
Mr. Gentry frowns. Damn. I need him to say it. He did before,
in the report, but I cannot put the words in his mouth.
You did not notice anything about him while he was pumping
gas?
 I fight the urge to pantomime the act of pumping gas, to trigger his memory.
Oh, his hand was bandaged,
 Mr. Gentry says. He sits back a
little.
I resist the urge to throw a triumphant smile at Ben. I say quietly,
His hand was bandaged. Can you recall which hand?
Landry has moved in his seat. He knows what is coming, and he
cannot do anything to stop it. His train just jumped the tracks and
now he has to watch it crash.
His left hand.
With gauze?
Yes.
Mr. Gentry, when you saw Mr. Washington on television did
you happen to notice if his hand was bandaged?
Yes, it was. They showed him being led into the police station,
in handcuffs, and you could see his hands behind him. The left was
bandaged in gauze.
I see. Mr. Washington
s hand was bandaged as he was led into
the police station. According to Mr. Washington, he injured his hand
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
repairing a friend
s door frame that very day.
 This to explain the
wooden splinters found in his hand that we maintain came from
wielding a bat at Marcus Rhodes. 
What is odd is that neither of Mr.
Washington
s hands was bandaged when the police arrived.
 I approach the witness box, so close I can see Mr. Gentry
s hands clutch
each other.
And no gauze was found at Mr. Washington
s residence. You
see, one of the policemen bandaged Mr. Washington
s hand. It had
begun to bleed.
 It began bleeding when he attempted to strike one
of the police officers, or so Detective Wilkins told me. 
The police
bandaged it.
So you see, Mr. Gentry, until the evening of March thirty-first
Calvin Washington was not wearing a gauze bandage on his left
hand. Are you sure he was wearing one at the gas station?
 My tone
holds pity, as if I am trying to offer him a way out.
No. Wait, yes.
 This reversal causes several people to lean forward closer. They are sharks, and the scent of blood on the water is
unmistakable.
Which is it, Mr. Gentry?
Yes, I saw the bandage.
 His face quivers like that of a rabbit.
He could have worn it then and lost it or taken it off later.
Except that no one who saw Calvin Washington from March
twenty-eighth to March thirty-first has mentioned that bandage,
Mr. Gentry. No one but you. Until it appeared on the eleven o
clock
news no one but members of the Macon Police Department saw it.
My voice is laden with conviction. You are wrong, I say with every
syllable. Wrong, wrong, wrong.
Mr. Gentry, is it possible that the man you saw at the gas station
on March twenty-eighth was not the defendant, but someone else?
Someone who was wearing a bandage and the sight of that bandage
on the news triggered a recollection?
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
I . . . I don
t know,
 he concludes. He looks to Landry as if he
can help him, but he can
I have no further questions.
 Before I have reached my seat
Landry is standing and asking, 
Mr. Gentry, did anyone ask that
you identify Mr. Washington?
Mr. Gentry tilts his head to one side. 
Pardon?
Landry clears his throat before saying, 
Mr. Gentry, no one asked
that you identify Mr. Washington
Landry gestures toward his client
did they? No one from my office contacted you?
 Mr. Gentry says, sitting straighter. 
No, sir. I simply called
the police after I saw the news piece.
Idiot, I think, as Landry thanks Mr. Gentry. Landry just fumbled in the worst way. By implying that Mr. Gentry could have been
sought by the defense he introduced a previously foreign suspicion
into the jurors
 minds and did nothing but reinforce the fact that
Gentry
s identification was based on the television coverage, our
point exactly.
When Pullman asks if I have anything further I rise from my
seat. 
Mr. Gentry, did you happen to notice what Mr. Washington
was wearing on the news broadcast when he was arrested?
Gentry squirms like a worm on a hook. 
Um, shorts and a shirt.
Could you be more specific?
Denim shorts and a basketball jersey.
 His voice quivers.
I see. No further questions.
re done.
I sit and allow myself a quick glance at Ben. He stares ahead as
Landry hurries to call his next witness, a medical expert who will
attempt to downplay the importance of the blood found on Calvin
Washington
s clothes.
It is difficult to sit still. I am juiced full of adrenaline. I look
down and notice a small mark on my pad of paper. 
Good job
reads. Ben wrote it. My face twitches with the effort of repressing a
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
smile. This is the biggest check-plus of my life, the largest compliment ever received. Better than any A on a paper, better than passing the bar, better than all of Henry
s I love yous.
I look up, intent on concentrating on Landry
s efforts to reconstruct his case. We are going to win. I know it. We have taken reasonable doubt away. We are going to win.
Chapter Twenty-seven
September 19, 2000
Despite my machine
s autobrew feature I scorched the coffee this
morning. I spent four minutes brushing the charred taste from my
mouth. When I left the house I found that raccoons had invaded
my trashcan, leaving a trail of garbage along my driveway. Now my
panty hose have snagged on my chair.
I feel behind my leg. Damn. The hole is even bigger than I
thought. Ben catches me squirming.
Goldberg, what are you doing?
I need to go to the bathroom. I have a hole in my panty hose.
No one cares about your panty hose.
I care.
 I don
t want to face the verdict of my first murder trial
in torn panty hose.
Pullman is going to return any minute,
 he warns.
It will only take a minute. I have a spare pair in my briefcase.
Ben raises his eyebrows, but I sense he is not surprised. 
then, but make it quick.
The bailiff stands to attention and I hesitate, but Ben says, 
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
If Pullman comes I
ll tell him you had to visit the ladies
 room. He
used to nervous preemies.
I hurry to the restroom. 
Preemies,
 the slang term for new lawyers. I wonder when I will stop being a preemie. I enter a stall,
remove my torn hose, extract the new pair, and struggle into them
with several muttered oaths. I emerge from the bathroom a little out
of breath and red in the face.
When I return to the courtroom Pullman is there, seated. He
looks at me, but does not say a word. His stare is enough.
All better?
 Ben asks.
Landry calls his last witness, Dr. Moran, a forensics expert
who testifies that the wood splinters found in Washington
s hand
and clothes and car might not have come from the baseball bat
used to beat Marcus Rhodes. Dr. Moran wears bifocals and a
toupee and has the voice of a child. Several times Judge Pullman
has to ask him to speak up or repeat his answer. The jurors frown
at him or smile, amused. I hope Landry did not pay much for his
expertise.
After Landry finishes, Ben asks the witness a few questions,
managing, with a few well-placed modifiers, to make Dr. Moran
retract nearly everything he has said. Landry does not reexamine.
The defense rests. I glance at my watch. It
s 10:07 a.m.
The closing arguments begin. Ben reminds the jury of the damning evidence they have heard. He tells them that this is not only
about determining guilt or innocence: it is about justice. Justice for
the dead
Marcus Rhodes and Dominic Brown
and justice for
their family members. At this, Emily Brown sobs, just loudly enough
to carry to the jury box. She could not have timed it better.
Landry adjusts his glasses before rising to give his speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you have heard my esteemed colleague speak
of justice. Justice is what we should keep foremost in our mind.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
Justice for all. My client too deserves your justice. Our criminal trial
decisions are predicated on the concept of reasonable doubt. Surely,
you have heard of several instances in which this applies. Has the
prosecution managed to find the actual instrument that killed both
Mr. Rhodes and Dominic Brown? Have they discovered that gun or
connected it to my client? They have not. Have they shown that the
discussion between my client and Mr. Rhodes is the stuff of which
murders are made? Have they proven that no one but my client, Mr.
Washington, could have committed this crime?
He continues in this vein for some time and concludes with a
hope that the jurors will keep the word 
justice
 in their minds during their deliberations. I glance at my watch: 10:32.
Judge Pullman instructs the jury. He is thorough in his explanations. He excuses them to deliberate at 11:01. Court is adjourned
until the jurors reach their verdict.
Come on,
 Ben says. 
s go back to the office.
 He reads my
face. 
They
ll call us when they are ready.
On the way, we talk about the weather. It is so hot Ben mops his
brow with his handkerchief three times during the trip. I feel full of
tension and humming awareness, like a springboard platform awaiting the feet of a diver.
Once inside Ben tells me, 
Be ready.
I resolve not to go farther than the restroom.
Today the offices are quiet, with fewer phones ringing. I nod
hello to the secretaries, notice that the toner seems to be low on the
copy machine, and that the water is almost gone from the cooler
again. I will have to hurry if I want to get a cup. Carl is coerced into
hauling another five-gallon bottle atop the cooler most often. He
never says no.
Speak of the devil, I think. Several yards off, Carl huddles over
the desk of our newest intern. 
Desk
 may be too glorified a term as
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the intern is working at a small typing table we used to rest copier
paper on. Carl is explaining scheduling trial dates and judge rotations, pointing with his forefinger to boxed dates on a calendar. His
voice is low and patient. Passing by, I realize that something is off.
Slowing my steps, I look back over my shoulder. Carl isn
t twitching, tapping, or pacing.
Standing in front of my office
s air-conditioning unit, I consider
this. Have I seen Carl tap his pencil against his teeth when he talks
to Ben? Not that I remember. What about with Will? Does he shuffle his feet or play with his paper clips? No, I saw them talking by
the elevator last week and Carl seemed fine.
The ideas taking shape in my mind both fascinate and terrify
me. Where have I been this past year? Am I really that unaware, that
blind? Yes. Yes. So wrapped up in my escape from New York, my
anger at Henry, studying for the bar, and my introduction to Macon
that I noticed little around me. Too wrapped up in the drama of
my own trial
World v. Natalie Goldberg
that I did not see what
everyone else must. Carl is only nervous when around me. I try to
stop the smile from forming but I cannot.
Once the air conditioner has cooled me to room temperature
I concentrate on my in box. My own paper Tower of Pisa, ready
to topple any second. Sorting the pending cases and the calls from
defense attorneys looking to wheel and deal occupies me until onethirty when my rumbling stomach alerts me to the fact that it has
not consumed anything since a breakfast of burned coffee and yogurt. I cannot predict when we will be called back to court, but
better safe than hungry. I speed-dial Atlanta Bread Company for
some soup and salad.
I have consumed a third of it when Ben stops outside my office.
He carries his worn briefcase in his hand. I think he cannot be here
to tell me what he says next. 
They
re ready.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
A chunk of tomato dangles on my plastic fork. It moves a bit, as
my hand shakes.
So soon?
 I say. It is 2:19. They have deliberated less than three
hours.
He nods. I trash my lunch and gather my things, fumbling with
my bag.
Ben tells me I have time to visit the washroom if I like, for which
I am grateful. I check my panty hose twice. Then I reapply my lipstick and exhale several times. At least I don
t feel nauseous.
Ben seems sure that such a short deliberation means we have
won it. I think we should have, but worry all the same. What if the
jury was swayed by Landry
s rhetoric?
The courtroom buzzes with speculation. I overhear two reporters laying odds on the verdict.
The bailiff announces court is in session and we rise for Judge
Pullman. He silences the whisperers with a request that all talking cease and that the jury be brought in. They come, single file,
eyes ahead. Judge Pullman asks if they have reached a verdict. Mr.
Jerison, the quiet, bespectacled man who serves as foreman, says
they have. Pullman asks, 
In the matter of the charge of first-degree
murder of Marcus Rhodes, how do you find?
Mr. Jerison pushes his glasses higher up on his nose and then
reads in a strong voice, 
We the jury find the defendant, Calvin
Washington, guilty.
 A few people inhale sharply. Others sigh, as if
relieved. A woman moans; I assume it is Calvin
s sister. Judge Pullman asks Mr. Jerison to continue. He does. The jury finds Calvin
Washington guilty of the murder of Dominic Brown.
s hands tighten into fists. He does not smile, but I know he
is happy. We got him. The jury did not buy the 
where is the gun
diversion or Landry
s attempt to make it seem the police railroaded
Calvin.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
We will begin the sentencing hearing tomorrow morning at
eight o
clock. Until then, members of the jury, you have my thanks
for your careful work.
 Pullman nods at the jurors and then rises.
I stand. Ben stands. We smile at each other. Then the Browns,
always seated behind us, call our names. Emily hugs each of us.
Thank you,
 she and her husband say. 
Thank you.
Ben squeezes her slender hands between his own and says, 
I am
sure Dominic is watching in heaven right now. May peace be with
you.
Then it is time for the Rhodeses to approach us. I have seen
Marcus
s mother, father, and brother in court. They have alternated,
as if taking shifts, but today all three are present and all three give
us their thanks. Tears slide down Mrs. Rhodes
s round cheeks. Ben
speaks to them, wishing them success in putting this behind them.
I follow Ben outside into a waiting throng of reporters. Camera
bulbs blind me. Ben has no trouble. He smiles and says the jury did
extraordinary work and that he is satisfied to have removed a dangerous killer from the community. After he finishes, questions are
shouted at him. One aggressive redhead shoves a microphone under
my mouth and asks how I feel about tomorrow
s sentencing hearing
and do I think we will get the death penalty? How to answer? I cannot say 
I hope not,
 so I say I cannot predict the outcome and that
I can only hope for the best.
We take a cab back to the office, seeking relief from the humidity-soaked air. 
We did it,
 Ben says. He turns so that he is facing
me. 
You did good work. Handled Gentry like a pro.
Thank you.
 I am tempted to look outside the cab window for
flying pigs.
s go tell Will.
Will is locked behind his heavy oak door but he emerges from
his cool office to hear our story. 
Congratulations,
 he says. 
To224
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
morrow is sentencing? I
ll be out of the office, paying my respects to
the governor and his inner circle, but keep me informed.
The news of our victory spreads. As we walk the halls others call
out their congratulations. How very different from Walters, MacLittle,
and Tate, where achievements were viewed by colleagues with envy
or skepticism.
Do you need help with tomorrow
s statement?
 I ask Ben.
He shrugs. 
Nothing has changed. It
s more Landry
s show than
ours.
 Landry has to persuade the jury that there were mitigating
factors that compelled his client to act as he did.
Go work on your other cases,
 he says. 
Day is almost over anyway.
s 4:10, but since when do we keep normal hours?
In my office I try to return to the tasks I left unfinished but
concentration eludes me. My clothes still smell of the scent Emily
Brown wears, something with lavender in it. My mind jumps to
tomorrow
s outcome. Will they decide to send him to the chair? My
throat tightens. 
s out of your hands,
 I tell myself. 
Your job is
done.
At 4:32 Carl knocks on my door. 
Hey, Nat, I heard about your
win. Congratulations.
Thanks. Most credit is due to Ben.
He rubs his jaw, which has no five o
clock shadow. Huh. I have
never seen Carl with facial hair. Either he shaves three times a day
or he does not grow it much. Another thing I have never thought
about.
Come on in. I can
t think.
Wired?
 he asks, sitting down.
A little.
 The energy that has been coursing through me ever
since the word 
guilty
 was spoken has settled to a low-pitched
hum, but I can still feel it.
It will pass,
 he predicts. 
When it does, you
ll be exhausted.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Probably sleep better than you have in weeks.
 Is he blushing? Or
are his cheeks just that shade?
I could use it.
He glances at my desk, at my multiple 
to do
 lists and color-coded file folders. He straightens his tie, although it is already
straight.
How is Sarah?
 I ask.
Good. I wanted to tell you she is looking for a job. She suspects
that once the divorce goes through William will drag his feet on
anteing up alimony or child support.
That
s what the courts are for.
He looks at my paper clip collection. I wait, counting mentally.
One, two, three, four, five, six. He begins drumming his fingers
against his leg. Aha!
Sentencing is tomorrow?
Yes.
 Talk of tomorrow makes me queasy.
He drums his fingers a little faster.
Everything okay?
 I ask. He looks up. My, his eyes are blue.
Sure, why?
Well, you
re sort of fidgeting.
 His fingers are halfway through
their up-and-down cycle.
Oh. No, I
m just . . . I
ll stop.
 He does.
Come to think of it, Carl, I
ve noticed you tend to fidget.
Yes. I notice you only seem to do it around me, though.
Am I being cross-examined?
 he asks. Now he is pulling at the
handkerchief in his breast pocket. He is going to ruin its perfect
triangle point.
No, I
m sorry. I just hope I don
t make you nervous.
 This is
not the truth, but it sounds good.
No, you
 He sighs. His eyes are the color of hydrangeas.
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
You don
t. Really. It
s me. I just
I like you, Natalie. A lot.
sounds anguished.
Okay.
 I am trying not to blush.
I just don
t want to compromise our working relationship, so
m sorry I mentioned it and you can forget it.
Can I?
 This is not the sort of thing you forget. I know. I tried
not to desire Henry. Look how well that turned out.
t you?
I don
t know,
 I tell him. We stare at each other for a few moments, and then look away. I contemplate turning the air conditioner to high.
I have a court case tomorrow, so I better start preparing,
says. I wonder whether this is true, and then decide that Carl
s faults
t include lying.
Good luck,
 I say.
After he leaves I stand in front of the air conditioner and let the
air flutter the sleeves of my silk blouse. When was the last time I felt
hot in the face like this? Oh, yes, this morning, after changing my
panty hose, on my rush back to the courtroom. Somehow our victory seems distant, as if it occurred days, and not hours, ago.
I think about tomorrow. My stomach gurgles. Carl was a terrific
distraction from the sentencing of Calvin Washington, but now my
brain has remembered and it has alerted my body. I wonder if it is
the cool air or if it is fear causing the goose bumps to rise on my
skin.
Chapter Twenty-eight
September 22, 2000
Where is the damn rice cereal? Rows of cereal line the shelves of aisle
3, a cardboard land of plenty, but can I find the one box I want? I
glare at cartoon rabbits and leprechauns as if they are responsible
for my missing cereal. Aha, there it is! Holding the middle ground
between the land of the sugar laden and the land of the fiber rich. I
toss the box into my shopping cart, atop several containers of yogurt
and a bottle of orange juice.
The cart
s right front wheel squeaks as I push forward toward
the promise of bread products. My pursuit of carbohydrates recalls
a conversation I had with Lacey last weekend in which she told me
that her uncle was on the Atkins diet. 
As much bacon as he wants
but no bread or sugar. I don
t care what they say about man can
t live
by bread alone. I can,
 she insisted. 
Especially if it has cinnamon
sugar on top.
 I wonder if Lacey
s boyfriend has noticed she has the
gastrointestinal strength of a goat. Tom? No, Todd. God, don
t let
me screw that up when I meet him. I
m getting as bad as my father
with names.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
He called last night. When I did not get out of bed to answer
the phone he left a message. 
Nat? Are you there? It
s Dad. I heard
about your case. I wanted to see how you are. Give me a call when
you get a chance, princess.
He knew we had won the case and he knew what it meant. He
might have predicted my reaction to Calvin Washington
s death
sentence: vomiting until my stomach was empty. His voice on the
message, inquisitive, almost fearful, said it all. My God, he had not
called me 
princess
 since I told him about Henry.
I reach for the saltines, resolving to combine them with ginger
ale. My stomach has not settled completely. After this morning
breakfast of toast and tea I rushed to the bathroom to find the seasick heaving had subsided, but it was a close call. I grab a loaf of
wheat bread, checking the sell date. My cart
s squeaky wheel protests my efforts to steer it around the corner to aisle 5, Canned
Vegetables, Fruits, and Soups.
Chicken soup sounds good. I put three cans in the bottom of
the cart, careful not to crush the bread or crackers. Up the aisle, past
the harried mother of three whose hair needs cutting, to the canned
fruit. I have a weakness for canned fruit salad. 
White trashtastic
Lacey would say, but I don
t care. It is comfort food and I need
comfort.
When the jurors had reentered the courtroom, shuffling, eyes
averted, my stomach clenched. I wondered if the eyes they were
avoiding were each other
s. If they could not come to agreement,
Calvin Washington could not be sentenced to death. In Georgia, if
just one juror holds out, the death penalty cannot be imposed.
Mr. Jerison read from a sheet of paper that moved in his quaking
hands. His voice sounded robotic. He said that the jury had found
for sentencing Calvin Washington to death. Emily Brown hiccupped behind me. Calvin moved in his chair, drawing the bailiffs
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
forward, but no restraint needed to be applied. Landry grimaced,
his boyish face aged by disappointment. The jury members stared
ahead, looking like flu survivors, weary and wanting their beds.
Did I move or stir or make a sound? I don
t know. Pullman
remanded Washington to the Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Prison. He told him, 
What you have done is irrevocable. The
harm you have inflicted cannot be undone, and now you will face
the consequences of your actions. May God have mercy on your
soul.
 Calvin
s sister, Donna, and cousin, Toya, sobbed into fistfuls
of tissues. Then Pullman thanked the jurors and they rose, aged two
decades since entering the courtroom two weeks ago.
Ben turned to me and said only, 
re done.
Excuse me,
 the mother of three says. Behind her, two of her
kids argue over who gets to hold the box of cookies.
Sorry,
 I apologize, stepping back so that she can grab two cans
of cling peaches. The children are yelling 
Give it to me, it
s my
turn!
 as I walk past them.
In the produce section I stare at a pile of tomatoes. They are
stacked precariously; one false move will topple the pyramid. Sort of
like Ben
s office. Ben. After the trial he spoke to the press and made
hearty about the verdict and the sentence, giving the jurors credit
for an 
incredibly difficult task.
 I caught the end of his speech,
after my vomiting subsided. He did not say anything about my sudden departure to the restroom. He did not ask if I was okay. He
could see that I was not.
I touch the topmost tomato, stroking its delicate, silky skin. So
vulnerable to bruising, so easily spoiled. I pick it up, carefully, and
transfer it to a clear produce bag and place it in the front of the
cart.
My food purchases fill six brown paper bags. When will I eat
it all?
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
After I have unloaded the groceries into the trunk, my car sits
lower. The backseat contains bags of clothes to be donated to Goodwill along with household items Lala asked me to drop off when
I mentioned my impending visit. I turn on the radio just in time
to catch the weather update. Seventy-eight degrees and sunny. A
perfect day for playing hooky, though I am not. Will gave me the
day off.
He came into my office yesterday afternoon, closing the door
behind him. His gaze settled on the photographs of my father and
me taken outside Harvard Yard. I had hung the pictures earlier that
morning, bruising my thumb with a misplaced hammer blow. His
gaze returned to me as he sat.
Hello, Will,
 I said, because he seemed disinclined to start.
He templed his fingers. 
m sorry I missed you yesterday. You
and Ben did a wonderful job.
 His stress on the adjective was subtle,
but I caught it. Wonderful.
Thanks.
He stared nearsightedly at my photographs. 
re decorating.
He sounded surprised.
Yes, I thought it time.
 Along with the photographs and diplomas I had added a small potted fuchsia to the windowsill nearest
the desk.
So you
re not planning to leave?
 He sat back and crossed his
legs.
My smile acknowledged his relief. 
I would like to stay.
 Perhaps
I could install a small table by the closet door, something less masculine, less Guvnor in style?
I know it was tough yesterday. I thought you might decide this
wasn
t for you.
 Ben must have said something to Will.
I rubbed at the faint hammering that had begun behind my right
temple. Recalling the moment when the verdict was read, when the
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
word 
death
 sank into my brain and rippled outward, made my
head hurt.
I believe in the work we do here,
 I said, leaning forward to rest
my elbows on the desk. Its solidity made me feel more secure. 
I don
t ever want to prosecute another capital case again.
He uncrossed and recrossed his legs. 
I thought you might say
that . . .
My torso felt as if it was being squeezed too tight. Here it comes,
I thought. He will not keep me on, cannot let me continue if I will
not play this part of the game.
We need to get someone in here to replace Jeffrey. It
s well past
time. Unfortunately, Harvard-educated sharks don
t swim downstream here all that often.
 His weary smile prompted one of my
own. 
I cannot guarantee that we will not have to come to you for
another capital case again, but this is only the third such trial we
have ever prosecuted during the past thirty years. The chances are
very slim.
He looked at me and I knew he saw the purple shadows underneath my eyes. 
You should take tomorrow off,
 he advised.
Okay.
 His eyebrows leaped at my quick acceptance. 
Oh, and
Will, do you remember discussing my taking some vacation time?
 Difficult to believe that conversation took place only three months ago.
Of course. Do you have something planned?
 He rose from his
seat, ready to resume his other duties.
I thought I might visit my parents in early November. I
ll check
the court schedules and talk to the others.
 I doubted Ben or Carl
would object.
m glad you
re staying.
Me, too. Oh, and thanks for not assuming I was some sort of
ACLU undercover agent.
 I remembered Helen
s comments about
the suspicions regarding my motives for coming here.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Will
s laughter oozed out of him, thick and deep. 
I never
thought you were. I just assumed you were crazy, like the rest of us.
He winked at me before going.
The man behind the cracked linoleum counter at Goodwill eyes
the two bottled ships Lala gave me to donate as if he expects them
to explode. I push them closer and heft the three bags of clothing
onto the counter, not giving him time to object. The clerk hands
me a tax-deduction form. Then he shifts the clothes bags onto the
crowded and not quite clean floor. When I exit the swinging door
into the afternoon sun he still has not touched the model ships
imprisoned in glass.
Prison. That is where Calvin Washington is now. In Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Prison in Jackson, wearing a white uniform with state prisoner printed on the back. Where he will live
while appeals are filed, if he can find a lawyer to write them. The
three habeas corpus appeals allowed death-row prisoners must show
that the defendant
s fundamental rights were violated during the
trial or the sentencing. Composing them is an involved process, so
finding a lawyer to do so is no easy task. Who knows? Maybe Calvin
will find someone like Stephen Bright, of the Southern Center for
Human Rights, who will move heaven and earth to get his sentence
commuted, but the odds are slim.
It is more likely that years from now Calvin Washington will
consume his last meal. Then his scalp and right leg will be shaved
free of hair. He will wear a diaper under his jumpsuit as the guards
escort him to the room where the electric chair waits. A leather flap
will be placed over his face, hiding it from the witnesses present to
observe his last moments.
In the room behind him, a box with three wires will await three
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
prison staff. Each will press the button. The wires are braided together so that they will not know which of them pushed the kill
button. As if that can ease their guilt.
For four seconds after the button is pressed 1,800 volts will penetrate his skull through the electrode on his forehead. A 900-volt
cycle lasting seven seconds will stun his heart, lungs, and kidneys.
A third 300-volt cycle will make his heart
s fibers quiver for 109
seconds, forcing the muscle to shut down. It is supposed to take two
minutes to die in Georgia
s electric chair. It has taken longer. Calvin
does not seem the type to go easily.
My kitchen looks as though raccoons have run through it. Containers of food lie about, emptied from the cabinets so that I could
clean inside this morning. I settle the bags of groceries atop any
clear space on the table. Stacking cans of soup upon newly cleaned
shelves, I remember my mother doing the same. She would place
cans any which way, not concerned whether the label was visible. I
used to rearrange them, turning them face out and aligning them
just so. She laughed when she opened the cupboards. 
Aaron, Nat
been at it again,
 she would tell my father. 
I think we are the only
parents on the block with a child who rearranges soup cans.
 She
made it sound like a compliment, not a disorder.
The cans sit straight ahead, labels out. I rotate one a half-inch
to the right, just to see. After five seconds my hand reaches to
straighten it. The brown paper bags rustle as I fold them and put
them in the now mostly empty recycling bin. Not bad for a half-day
of cleaning.
I decide to place the phone call I avoided all morning. The phone
rings three times before it is answered with a bright 
hello.
Hi, Mom.
 I settle into my corduroy seat cushion, my knees
bumping the chair
s arms.
Natalie!
 Her shout must have reached the neighbors. I hold
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
the phone out from my ear. 
Aaron, it
s Natalie!
m made happy
by my decision to extend the phone. The possibility of hearing loss
is acute.
Mom, I
 A click and then, 
Natalie?
 My father has picked
up the study phone or the upstairs line.
Honey, she
s on the line,
 my mother explains.
I don
t hear her,
 my father complains.
m here, Dad.
 They squawk at each other like temperamental
parrots.
Nattie, how are you?
 he asks before my mother can echo, 
Yes,
sweetie, how are you? Your father is convinced you
re not feeling
well. He has been stalking the phone.
Now, that
s not true,
 he says. 
ve just been hoping she would
call.
Pacing by it, actually,
 my mother continues.
m okay. I took the day off. Actually, Will, the DA, gave it
to me.
Wasn
t that nice?
 my mother remarks.
Yes, very,
 I reply, unable to keep the dryness from my voice.
And we talked about my work. I
m going to stay on.
 I exhale and
the stomach jitters that settled hours ago begin quaking anew.
re okay?
 He doesn
t remark on my staying.
After throwing up for several hours, yes, Dad, I
m fine.
 His
half sigh, half harrumph resonates more than my mother
s anxious
cries about my intestinal trouble. Have I been able to keep anything
down? she demands. I should try some crackers with a little ginger
ale. My assurance that I bought both sends her to exclaiming that I
shouldn
t have to perform this task for myself and isn
t there someone who could run these errands for me?
I assure her that I am capable of grocery shopping, but the scroll
of names that appears in my head at my mother
s question surprises
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
me. Carl. Helen. Lala. Any of them would fetch me crackers. And
there are more cracker fetchers in my future, I suspect. More friends
to make, more people to stop pushing away.
And a little broth,
 she concludes. I blink myself back to her
voice.
Thanks, Mom.
 I am unsure what advice I have just
sanctioned.
Do you think you
ll visit anytime soon?
 My father tries to
keep the anxiety from his voice. He is worried, and with reason.
He knows how it goes with me. The throwing up, the exhaustion,
the nightmares. He is my father and he has held my curls from my
face as I heaved over the toilet after taking my SATs. What is that
compared to sending a man to the chair? This pain, then, is enough
to earn forgiveness, whereas my heartache over Henry was not. My
father
s love is a complicated thing.
Yes. I spoke to Will about taking some time in early November.
My mother makes a loud, high sound of delight. 
I thought I would
visit Lacey in New York and then come home for a few days.
My parents
 voices overlap as they discuss what we will do and
how nice it will be to see me and did I know that Gerard Manowitz
is in rehab? As if I need to know all the neighborhood gossip prior
to my arrival, lest I unwittingly make a drug rehab joke before the
Manowitzes.
Okay, well, I just wanted to check in.
 I try to extract myself
from the debate about whether Gerard was addicted to cocaine or
pain medication. Mom holds out for the pain pills, Dad for the
cocaine. I would lay money on cocaine. Gerard wasn
t the pain-pill
type and it sounds more like my mother trying to excuse his addiction on the grounds of a medical basis, improving his condition
with some creative remembering.
ll talk to you soon,
 I say.
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
Yes, okay,
 Mom says. 
We love you, honey. Remember, ginger
ale and crackers and maybe a heating pad.
Take care, Nattie. I love you,
 Dad murmurs.
Love you, too.
 My hand is slow to set the phone down, to
release the flow of love. It was as before, when they would call and
talk at once and I would only understand half of the conversation. I
mustn
t expect it to be this way. My parents
 disappointment that I
will remain here made their joy at my impending visit more buoyant. They want me home, but it isn
t home any longer, or it is, but
not my current home. I sigh and lever myself out of the chair. I still
have things to do, on my day off.
Chapter Twenty-nine
September 23, 2000
The rose-patterned sheets, tangled from my restless sleep, cover half
of my body. I move my head to rest flat on the pillow. Morning
comes, the air weighty and damp, the sounds outside the window
muffled. My pillow smells of toothpaste. I try to burrow deeper into
the bedding, into myself, wrapping my left arm about my middle,
my fingertips resting just by the scoop of my navel. My skin is soft
and I smile. Sometimes the world is a dream from which I do not
want to be woken.
Birdsong, loud and screechy, wakes me. Damn jays. They love
Lala
s garden. Groaning and rubbing my nose into the pillow, I
curse the birds. What time is it anyway? The digital numbers of the
bedside alarm shock me. Ten-thirty. When was the last morning I
awoke later than nine? I cannot recall. Even on weekends my body
cannot lie still after the sun has crossed the windowpanes to make a
checkerboard pattern on my bed.
My limbs protest, still full of silty sleep, as I rise from bed and
stretch. Oomph. The girl in the mirror is a fright, but she looks
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
better than the girl of yesterday. The shadows beneath my eyes have
paled and the darkness in the pupils has waned. My ears still ring
with Landry
s pleas for the jurors to have mercy upon Calvin Washington, but his voice has quieted.
I shuffle into the kitchen for coffee and toast. Perhaps I will have
a banana, too. A bright pink sheet of paper hangs suspended by
three magnets on my freezer, just above eye level, my long to-do list.
While the coffeemaker chirps and coughs scented steam I reread the
list, figuring out what tasks to handle today. I decide on the library,
where I must return overdue books, and the dry cleaners where both
pickup and drop-off is in order. I also promised Lala I would visit
the garden-supply store and get some bulbs and potting soil for her.
The coffeemaker gasps its last and I hurry to transfer some of the
black liquid into my mug. No sugar, no milk, just unadulterated
caffeine.
The moist air warns of a thunderstorm. Back home they would
refer to this as an Indian summer day. Here we just call it September. The buttons on my shorts slip through their slots too easily.
I have lost weight. A few honest-to-goodness meals and some ice
cream ought to remedy that quick enough.
Adam and Sonya are coming today. I am taking them to Michael
s on Mulberry. It was that or Hooters. I smile at my own joke,
imagining their horror. Whenever Lacey complains that I have relocated to the middle of nowhere I am quick to observe that I live in a
city where there is both a Hooters restaurant and Nu-Way Weiners
and what has New York got to top these delightful establishments?
She always gasps, amused and appalled.
I am surprised to see the glowing button on my answering machine. Did I sleep through a phone call? I press play.
Natalie? It
s um . . .
 Carl. My stomach jumps. 
s Carl. I called
because Ben mentioned you weren
t feeling well and you were out
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
yesterday and I thought I would check to see if you are okay. Do you
need anything? I mean soup or ginger ale.
 Did Ben tell him I was
throwing up? No, wait. Ben did not know, not for sure. 
Anyway,
I just thought I would see how you
re feeling. And if you
re feeling
okay maybe you would like to catch a movie this weekend? They
having a Woody Allen marathon at the Cineplex.
 He rattles off his
home phone number and hangs up.
Either Carl got over his office-relationship taboo or he realized
rules don
t work the way they should sometimes. I hit save and decide to replay it later, to think about it later. Did he pick Woody
Allen because he likes him or because he thought I would? Later, I
tell myself.
I dump the small stack of library books, half of which I never
read, into my mesh tote. The last of the coffee washes the toast
crumbs down my throat. Once my teeth are brushed free of breakfast and my hair secured as much as possible, I exit the house. The
sky is an odd violet-gray.
My footsteps echo on the library
s wide halls. I return my books
to the gum-snapping girl with cornrows behind the counter. She
scans my card and checks the computer monitor where a record of
my borrowing sins glares green against a dark screen. I have to pay
seven dollars to restore my good reputation.
The men at the garden-supply store carry everything to my car,
though no object weighs more than five pounds. The rumored chivalry of the South still appears, just often enough to prevent me from
dismissing it. I turn the car toward home. Beyond the windshield
the thunderstorm clouds have passed, streaking the sky with violet
streamers.
It takes two trips from my car to Lala
s backyard to deposit her
supplies. It is less work carrying and shifting items than it is to dissuade Lala from carrying anything. I insist that I am capable of car241
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
rying a bag of soil, and no, my back does not hurt, and yes, I know
how to lift with my legs.
She gives me lemonade for my efforts. I sip the tart liquid while
she looks over her bulbs and tells me what they are and where
she will plant them. The string of Latin names lulls me to near
sleep. I close my eyes and tilt my face toward the sun. The jays
have relocated; Lala
s voice drones over the rhythm of a neighbor
water sprinkler and the sporadic barking of the dachshund down
the block.
I open my eyes to find Lala bent over her pool, rearranging the
rocks. After a few moments she turns, sees I am awake, and smiles.
A few fell,
 she explains.
I didn
t bring you one today,
 I say, struck by this fact. I always
bring a rock.
She waves away my regret with a hand freckled by sun and age.
ve had a lot on your mind.
 She settles a black stone more
firmly into the crevice of surrounding rocks. Then she rises and sits
down opposite me, lowering herself slowly into the seat, as if her
legs hurt.
You won your case. I saw your partner, Ben, on the news.
Yes.
re unhappy?
s going to die,
 I tell her, turning my eyes to the pool and
the goldfish. Two fish swim in small, lazy circles. Did there used to
be three?
I see,
 she says.
During sentencing the defense presents evidence of mitigating
circumstances. It is a last-ditch effort to convince the jurors not to
kill their client. Landry kept talking about Calvin
s past: about how
his stepfather used to beat him and lock him in closets and I could
see this little boy just terrified out of his mind.
 A soft breeze carries
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
the smell of fabric softener to me. Someone nearby is line-drying
clothes. I wrap my arms about my torso.
He killed two people, right?
 Lala rubs the side of her lemonade
glass.
Yes, and I think he ought to pay for that. I do. I just don
t think
killing him is that price.
 I sigh, exhausted by rhetoric and emotion.
I don
t want to talk of this, to think of it, anymore.
I noticed your gutter is hanging low,
 she says. I smile in
gratitude.
I know. I need to talk to Mrs. Miller.
 I do. She is on my kitchen
to-do list under 
Pick up Lala
s garden supplies.
 I need to ask how
much she wants for the house. I need to arrange for an inspection.
I need to figure out how to tell my parents I am buying a house
in Macon, Georgia. My smile widens, imagining their incredulity.
What
s wrong with equity? I will ask.
You going to buy the place?
 Her observation startles me. Then
I remember mentioning the possibility some time ago, when the
idea scared me with its permanence.
I think so. I like the neighborhood, and the neighbors.
Ditto,
 she says.
Her knees pop as she rises from the chair, her hands fisted on
the wooden arms for support. 
This heat
s making me drowsy,
 she
announces. 
I think I will go take a nap.
 She snorts. 
Good Lord,
but I am truly old. Naptime.
You stay out here,
 she says, flapping her hands at me when
I stand. 
Garden will do you good.
 I sit, happy to comply. After
I hear the door click shut I tilt my head back and stare at the
bag of bulbs resting by the stack of garden tools. When will they
bloom?
Damn. I meant to ask Lala about the cherry blossom festival.
She is sure to know when it begins. I hope to persuade my parents
s t e p h a n i e g ay l e
to come. They have to visit sooner or later, especially if I buy the
house.
Mom would love the festival. The streets and neighborhoods of
Macon burst pink in March as over 275,000 Yoshino cherry trees
bloom. The city holds a ten-day festival honoring the beauty of the
trees. Amusements, shows, and hot-air balloon rides attract tourists
from all over. I could do without the extra people filling parking lots
and restaurants, but I do love the trees. Pink and soft and slightly
out of focus, they are cotton candy come alive.
Maybe a trip to Lala
s garden will make my mother regard my
home more favorably. I can argue that I can start a garden of my
own in Macon far more easily than in Cambridge, where each square
foot of earth sells for roughly half my salary.
A cool breeze makes me shiver. Time to go inside and put on
long pants. It is nearly time to get ready for my dinner reservation
with Adam and Sonya. I offered to pick them up from the 1842
Inn, where they are staying. I want to call Mrs. Miller before she
retires for the evening. I inhale a breath full of sweet air, thick with
Lala
s flowers and the smoke of grilling meat. Someone is barbecuing. It seems someone always is.
I bid the goldfish good-bye and exit through the wooden gate.
As my feet crunch over gravel I stare at the gingham curtains hanging from my windows and practice saying 
Welcome to my home.
Home. It is a word that does not sound different here than where I
came from. A word that means the same everywhere. Home. Home.
Home.
acknowledgments
Many thanks to all those who nurtured this novel and me
during its creation: you are brave, kind people. Special karma
is owed to Beth Gallagher and Ann Sheybani for lending me
their writing wisdom and editing prowess; Bill Reiss, my agent
and angel; Carolyn Marino, my splendid editor; Julie Iatron
for superior cheerleading and the promise of Girl Scout sales
skills; and my parents, especially Mom, who gave me the title.
About the Author
STEPHANIE GAYLE
S work has appeared in the literary magazines
400 Words, Charles River Review, Edgar Literary Magazine, Ellipses,
and The Fourth River. Her story 
Interior Design
 was nominated for a
Pushcart Prize. She lives in Somerville, Massachusetts.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your
favorite HarperCollins author.
Praise for
My Summer of Southern Discomfort
No vacation is complete without a juicy, mysterious, captivating
beach read
whether you
re going to the beach or not.
Redbook (selected by Redbook as one of
the summer
s ten best books)
Uppity Southern women everywhere will find kindred spirits in
Stephanie Gayle
s debut novel, My Summer of Southern Discomfort.
The quirky characters are ones you won
t soon forget.
Loraine Despres, author of
The Scandalous Summer of Sissy LeBlanc
Natalie
s dilemmas are perfectly played, and Gayle
s economical
prose is peppered with sharp sentences . . . and clever fish-out-ofwater observations.
Publishers Weekly
This charming fish-out-of-water story shows how dreams can
come true
even dreams you didn
t know you had
when you
take a chance.
Laurie Horowitz, author of The Family Fortune
In this finely crafted debut novel, Gayle evinces a superb mastery
of character development, rendering Natalie
s various crises of
faith with empathic authenticity, endearing humor, and enviable
grace. 
Booklist
Stephanie Gayle is a witty and perceptive writer, and her first novel is a
sharply observed and funny book. Down in Georgia, her protagonist,
a young Harvard-educated lawyer named Natalie Goldberg, settles
into the neighborhood occupied by the Finns, the Sawyers, the
Caulfields, and the Finches.
Jay Atkinson, author of Legends of Winter Hill
A very appealing first novel with an engaging heroine and a cast
of very believable secondary characters.
Library Journal (starred review)
Rich with wry, self-deprecating humor.
Romantic Times Book Reviews
Credits
Designed by Susan Yang
Cover design by Mary Schuck
Cover photograph by Robert Manella/Getty Images
Copyright
This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue are
drawn from the author
s imagination and are not to be construed as real. Any
resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.
MY SUMMER OF SOUTHERN DISCOMFORT. Copyright 
 2007 by Stephanie Gayle.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this
text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered,
or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader March 2008
ISBN 978-0-06-164810-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com
